two planes just hit both towers of the
World Trade Center I think we're under
attack I need $10 million weapons
ammunition when he asked you to hold his
hand is there some sort of empathy and
war that comes out that nobody discusses
a great
question I just got approached and asked
if I wanted to be certified in these
enhanced interrogation techniques 92
other te that are said to show Abu
zubeda and abdal nashiri being
waterboarded were destroyed and he got
up from his desk and he whispered in my
ear kill them
all what year did you get home from
Greece was it 2000 summer of 2000 okay
so 911 happens obviously in 2001 yep
where were you 911 happened I was at CIA
headquarters
um you know this the story's kind of
quaint now after all these years and and
all that has happened over the course of
all these years um the on the morning of
911 I was supposed to go to the White
House with uh ker black who was the
director of the cia's counterterrorism
center we had a meeting scheduled with
condesa rice who was the National
Security adviser at the time on a on an
issue related to Greek
terrorism and so so um I got a
call at my desk uh saying that the
driver was uh was ready to take us down
to the White House so I walked over to
cofer's office to tell him that the
driver was ready and his secretary had a
TV on her desk now they're on every
computer but back then it was kind of
unusual to have a TV and she had a she
had a TV on and one of the towers of the
World Trade Center was burning and I
said what happened to the World Trade
Center and she said plane flew into
it and I naively said you know that
happened once before in
1932 a bomber flew into the Empire State
Building but it was really foggy then
it's so Crystal Clear today like how can
you not see that you're flying into the
World Trade Center and just as I said
those words the second plane hit and
then she turned to me I was standing
behind her she turned to me and she said
did you see that or did I imagine it and
I ran back to my office and I said guys
two planes just hit both towers of the
World Trade Center I think we're under
attack so everybody ran back up to the
front office now cofer's office had TVs
mounted above the door like CNN MSNBC
Fox BBC Russian Iranian whatever
Chinese and um and they were all
starting to switch over to El
feed silence and I mean there were you
know 150 200 people just standing there
staring at the TVs in silence and then
finally somebody shouts will somebody
please lead and then kofer snapped back
into you know real life and said you uh
go to the director's office you go to
security you talk to this guy
you um finally a cop came in to the it
to the office and said we're evacuating
headquarters everybody get
out nobody budged and then an hour later
he came back and said if you don't
evacuate you'll be arrested which they
meant so I mean talk about
chaos we all
evacuated um I got about halfway home I
lived about I lived about five or six
miles from headquarters I got about
halfway and I just couldn't get any
closer to my place so I just abandoned
my car on the side of the
highway um my
then what was she girlfriend she became
my wife uh met me at my place we walked
to the roof of my building we watched
the Pentagon burn and um we tried to
donate blood but the lines were so long
we just couldn't and um and then I said
to her this is ridiculous we got to get
back to work so we walked back to my car
and I made a u-turn on the the grassy
median and we went back to headquarters
and then I didn't leave headquarters for
another four days I just slept under the
desk and we got a bolt cutters and we we
cut the chain on the cafeteria doors and
we took all the food and cooked the food
and then laid it out on tables in the
hallway we ended up writing a check to
the Marriott for 10 or 15,000 bucks we
we stripped the place yeah yeah but you
know the story really begins a little
earlier than that I was working on Greek
terrorism and on um
training
so on July the 6th 2001 I remember it
like it was
yesterday I had a visiting delegation of
Intelligence Officers from the Middle
East and so my job was to welcome them
at the airport take them to their hotel
they get freshened up take them to CIA
headquarters they have a full day of
briefing
we exchange gifts I take them to the
director's office for a handshake and a
photo then I take them to uh uh a
steakhouse that night and then back to
the airport the next day so they come in
and I set up the full day of briefings
and I got some Junior analyst to come
and talk to us about Al-Qaeda I didn't
know anything about alqaeda I was so
focused on European
terrorism so um this is 20 000 2001 July
the 6th
so instead of this junior analyst coming
kofer black came along with the chief of
operations for the Osama Bin Laden
Group and I was like oh oh I said kofer
I said gentlemen this is Ambassador
kofer black he's the director of
counterterrorism for the CIA and this is
our chief of operations for the Osama
Bin Laden Group I was like so shocked to
see
them and they sit down and cover starts
and he says something terrible is going
to happen we don't know exactly what and
we don't know where but we know it's
going to be something on a scale that
we've never seen before he said we're
picking up
chatter with code words for a massive
attack the honey salesman is coming with
great quantities of honey there's going
to be a massive wedding
uh there's going to be a great soccer
match they're all codes for an attack he
said we're hearing Al-Qaeda Camp
commanders talking to their students and
they're crying on the phone and saying
I'll see you in
Paradise so he said I beg you gentlemen
if you have any sources inside
alqa please help us they all just sat
there
because they weren't focused on Al-Qaeda
either right so at the end of the day I
took him back to the hotel there were a
few hours we had uh before uh dinner and
I went back to Ker's office to thank him
and I said kofer I got to ask you was
that just for their benefit or were you
serious he said oh I'm deadly serious he
said something terrible is going to
happen I said that briefing scared the
hell out of
me well that was July 6th September 11th
it happens and I said to the there was a
guy I sat next to really great guy I
said this is what he was talking about
in July this is it the thing is is we
never expected it to happen here we
expected maybe another American Embassy
someplace a US military base a
hijacking we didn't expect they would
attack us right
here but they did and so literally
everything changed that day and it's
never returned to the pre- 911 way of
life
yeah so kofer he was the head of the the
counterterrorism center at the time
right um I might butcher this quote but
I think the the context is briefing the
president on the cia's plan to invade
Afghanistan and Bush said something
along the lines of how long is it going
to take and kofer said within a matter
of weeks flies will be walking on the
eyeballs of your enemies Mr President
that's right which is a [__] badass
quote he meant business too yeah he did
he meant it so long-winded way of asking
um what did you learn from kofer
black you know CF black went on to be
the vice president of Blackwater and he
took some uh very controversial uh
positions positions um that I personally
wouldn't have taken and I probably
disagree with his politics although I
don't really know what his politics are
but with that said kofer black was a god
inside the CIA I had nothing but the
highest possible respect for him um and
he was a good guy like he was replaced
by a monster by a by a
psychopathic murderous monster Jose yes
but kofer was a genuinely good guy who
wanted to serve his country and wanted
to do the right thing and um and wanted
to avenge the deaths of 3,000 Americans
you you know he he took 911 very very
personally he saw this as his own
personal
failing and it was something that we had
to we had to atone for you know when I
was finally leaving for
Pakistan um I went over to his office to
to say goodbye and um and he got up from
his desk and he shook my hand and and he
whispered in my ear kill them all and I
said really are we really there
already he came out to Pakistan while I
was there with Jose Rodriguez I was
their control officer and just to give
you an idea of the difference between
the two
men we went to see oh my God we went to
see the Pakistani intelligence service
courtesy call and I was dealing with
these guys 20 hours out of the
day most of them were Lieutenant
Colonels Colonels a couple of Brigadier
generals and
so I hope I'm not speaking out of out of
school but kofer loved to he loved the
Pakistani
accent so he would talk like this all
the time
sir you are I am loving you too much Mr
Goofer your good
man you know and
so one of the things that Pakistani say
all the time is when the when you and I
would say oh there was a it was just
huge you know thing or an issue or big
Scandal they would say that was a great
human
cry and Ker's like wait a minute wait a
minute are you saying there was a great
Hue and cry and they're like yes
sir not just the Hue is what you're
saying it was the Hue and the cry and
they're looking at each other like what
is he talking about and he's like I love
doing that to them I love it it's so
much fun and then I took him we had a
safe house uh that we shared with the
pakistanis and we had captured this guy
this bad bad guy and he was so dangerous
that we didn't dare put him in the jail
with all the other Al-Qaeda prisoners so
we chained him up in this Safe House in
a
bedroom so I'm telling kofer I said
listen while you were on the plane on
the way over we caught soand so he's
like you're kidding me I said' no we
caught him we busted down the door and
we grabbed him he goes where is he I
said he's actually
upstairs do you want to see him he goes
you know I've never met an actual
Al-Qaeda
guy so I said let's go see him this is
probably a violation of some Red Cross
regulation or something but I took him
up there I unlock the door the guy pops
up out of bed and he's chained both both
his ankles and his hands and he's
chained to the bed but enough wiggle
room that you can move around and you
know stretch or whatever so he jumps up
and I
said Mr Ahmed mahmed this
is this is Mr kofer Black of the Central
Intelligence
Agency and kofer nods and the guy nods
and kofer
says are you getting enough food and the
guy goes yes
sir are you sleeping sleeping well he
yes
sir are they treating you well he said
yes sir they
are okay then good
luck and we left and I locked the door
and he goes that was so cool I've never
met an Al-Qaeda terrorist I've spent
years chasing
them I take kofer back to the uh to the
Embassy I go back to the safe house
again to interrogate the guy and he's
like sir I have have to thank you so
much for bringing Amnesty International
to come and check on my I said I I to
myself I was like I didn't say he was
from Amnesty International I said he was
from the Central Intelligence
Agency but the guy heard Amnesty
International and I
go we're not animals we're treating you
with
respect he's like thank you sir thank
you thank you so much
but then then there was Jose so with
with kofer we're just having a grand old
time and the pakistanis love him and we
love him and we had this big banquet to
celebrate his he had just been named
Ambassador uh for uh Ambassador at large
for counterterrorism and Jose was going
to take his
position Jose never spoke a word and
then Jose um says to me you like this
job and I said I do actually as
stressful as it is and as long as the
hours are this is the best job I've ever
had in my life it was the most rewarding
you know I'm not exaggerating when I
when I say we would work 20 hour days it
and that was quite common in fact my
first pay period the twoe pay period I
sent in my cable saying I got my 80 hour
pay period and here's my overtime that
you have to document by the hour so I
had 80 hours of regular pay and 110
hours of over time yeah 110 hours of
overtime when I returned I had my
regular salary I had perdum I had danger
pay I had overtime and I had Arabic
language differential so I went home and
I bought a
house I bought a house with my with my
money that I saved just in six months in
Pakistan damn yeah so Jose is like you
like this job I said yes the best job I
ever had yeah good because you're going
to stay for another tour like
oh
okay guess I'll postpone my wedding
[Music]
then so last thing before we get into
Pakistan um I know you mentioned briefly
Carlos The Jackal before um that made me
think of you yes Billy W just died yeah
he was 98 years old Billy was an
absolute
legendary figure Billy W was a was a
member of the special forces the
military Special Forces he had served in
um wow uh Korea Vietnam Grenada you name
it and he had more than a dozen purple
hearts he had pretty much every medal
short of the Congressional Medal of
Honor that anybody can be
awarded um and the funny thing about
Billy genuinely nice guy never got
married never had children his life was
the military and then when he was two to
serve he became a CIA contractor and he
could do anything surveillance weapons
instruction whatever you wanted him to
do he would do so Billy and
I um were paired up in the summer of
2000 we did a thing together in the
Middle East that lasted a couple of
months and just hit it
off and
so he told me this story that at first I
didn't
believe and then kofer confirmed it to
me later and since then it's appeared in
books kofer was the CIA station Chief in
carum Sudan which is a
godforsaken armpit of the
world and Billy was there doing whatever
it was that Billy was doing probably
surveillance but you know Billy was one
of these guys that just went from
country to Country to Country whenever
somebody needed something they would
fill in the
gaps so it's Billy's day off and he's
down in the vegetable market where he's
you know the only white guy in the
cartoon vegetable market and he sees
another white guy and he says to the
other CIA contractor that he's with
that's Carlos The Jackal well Carlos The
Jackal of course had killed dozens of
people in an airport attack in Vienna
and he blew up a train uh and a train
station in France and killed a bunch of
cops and this this was wanted terrorist
number one of the
1970s his name was
was ilich Ramirez Sanchez he was a
Venezuelan National but known by the
numer Carlos The Jackal and he was a a
weapons uh expert and had ready access
because he had relationships with Outlaw
Nations like the libyans the Iraqis back
in the 70s
you know the North
Koreans he's he's a bond villain is what
he was that's what it comes down to
really so Billy says that's Carlos to
Jackal ah get the [__] out of here Billy
goes back to the Embassy goes to K's
office cofer's on an elliptical
machine he says what's up Billy Billy
says kofer I know you're not going to
believe me but I saw Carlos The Jackal
he's like yeah you're right I don't
believe you he said kofer I'm telling
you I know what Carlos looks like I saw
Carlos The Jackal he saidwell
if it was Carlos The Jackal then we're
going to have to find
him so Billy went back to the vegetable
market every single day for a
month and finally after a month he sees
Carlos again and he takes pictures click
click click click click click click
click click sends the pictures to
headquarters oh it's Carlos The Jackal
but this time Billy had followed him
home so now at least we knew where he
was you know I I think that the actual
details of the capture are still
classified the bottom line is they came
up with an absolutely
brilliant idea that would never have
occurred to
me and they lured
him they lured him to a doctor's
office on false
pretenses where he was sedated and when
he woke up he was on a French military
flight back to Paris to face murder
charges wow M I did not know that that's
awesome it's an incredible story and
he's telling me this story I'm like get
the [__] out of here he said I'm serious
I caught him I said Carlos The Jackal
The Most Wanted terrorist in world
history until Osama Bin Laden he goes
yeah he's buying
cabbages wow it was just one of those
things y Billy was legendary I ran into
him in the hallway about six weeks after
911 and he just disappeared on
911 and in the meantime I'm going into
C's depuy's office like every day you
got to send me to Afghanistan you got to
send me to Afghanistan I was one of only
16 Arabic speakers in the entire CIA at
the time you got to send me to
Afghanistan and they kept brushing me
off so I run into Billy in the hallway
and I was like Billy I said where you
been and he looks around he goes been in
Afghanistan I said yeah what are you
doing in Afghanistan and he goes I've
been killing people what do you think
I've been
doing and I said well that's why they're
not sending me cuz I was always the good
cop I was the lingu
and they're not interviewing anybody
they're not interrogating anybody
they're putting bullets in their brains
they didn't need me so I got mad I went
into cover's deputy's office who was an
old boss of mine I really liked him and
I said man if you don't send me to
Afghanistan right now I am going to quit
and I'm going to walk straight to Exxon
and I'm going to take my Arabic with me
and I am not looking back he's like
relax okay can you go to Pakistan I said
said yes when he says tomorrow I saides
what do you want me to do there he said
uh chief of counterterrorism operations
I said done so I called my girlfriend I
said I got to go to Pakistan tomorrow
she said okay for how long I said I
don't know maybe a year I'm not sure she
goes okay I'll meet you at your
apartment I'll help you pack so she
helped me pack and uh the next day I I
flew to
Pakistan so um yeah let's get into what
you were doing in Pakistan but I just I
have a question
on so what is our relationship with the
pakistanis and the reason I ask is
because we found Bin Laden at their
[__] West Point equivalent yep and uh
Rasheed Ralph yep the guy who was going
to blow up a bunch of airlines with
explosives and soft drink bottles
mysteriously escaped from their custody
and terrorism charges were drops what is
our relationship with them our
relationship with Pakistan is very very
complicated I've I've always
maintained that there are two separate
Pakistani intelligence Services I mean
there aren't it's one isi but in reality
it's two on the one hand you have a
whole bunch of guys who were all trained
at Sandhurst the British Military
Academy they all speak English like you
and I do they love the United States
many many of them vacation here they
want their kids to go to school in the
United States and they would do
literally anything for the CIA they were
the only ones that would do our
operations without wearing bulletproof
vests M and then there are the other
guys with the long
beards and the
short shaar kamis giving you the stink
eyee putting Bin Laden up in ababat
right in the middle of West Point mm
shooting uh shooting at uh
westerners and not doing follow-up
investigations when other people shoot
at
westerners two very very different
strains inside that that intelligence
service and I'll add another
thing it's not even that clearcut as to
who the good guys are and who the bad
guys are look at look at the Taliban the
word Taliban is the plural of the word
Talib Talib in both uh pashu and Arabic
means student right so Taliban is
students
plural in the 1990s the early
1990s Pakistani trucks on their way from
Pakistan to Iran were getting hijacked
in Afghanistan cuz it was chaos in
Afghanistan right nobody was in charge
it was just a big mess and so Benazir BH
who was the
pro-american Prime Minister of
Pakistan uh said we're going to do
something about all these truck truck
hijackings we need to protect the trucks
I have an idea she says why don't we go
to the madrasas the religious schools in
Pakistan will take these these Afghan
Taliban the Afghan students who were
studying they ran away from Afghanistan
will take these Taliban out of the
madrasas and we'll have them sit in the
trucks with the truck drivers so if
somebody tries to hijack the truck they
can protect the cargo and the
driver so they started doing that and
that made it easier trucks weren't
getting hijacked and then she said you
know what might even be better is if we
take these Taliban and we put them in
villages all along the truck routes that
way they don't have to drive back and
forth and back and forth and they could
just protect the trucks along the
routs and then we'll give them weapons
and money so they can protect
themselves and the next thing you know
she created the [__]
Taliban and then she lost control of it
and it took the whole country and then
it let Al-Qaeda come in and the rest is
history it was an
accident it was poor policy
planning and we're still paying the
price yeah I I will admit to a bias that
I have too you know I read the
Washington Post every day the New York
Times The Wall Street Journal I read all
the big papers because I have a radio
show every day and you have to be
informed every day I see these op-eds
and editorials like oh my God the plight
of Afghan women oh my God the girls
can't go to school and the women are
veiled they chose
that the Taliban didn't come from outer
space and land in Afghanistan these are
the Fathers and Sons and cousins and
nephews and children of all these
oppressed Afghan women they had 20 years
to decide what they wanted and this is
what they
decided so why don't we just walk
away this was their
decision that's it
yeah I guess we could just try to shove
democracy down their throats right
exactly when they've never asked for it
yeah and then we're going to take a
restaurant owner from Baltimore and make
him the president of Afghanistan thank
you very
much
yeah so your first day in
Pakistan um what was the job description
and how did you get
started well there was no job
description there was there there hadn't
been a chief of counterterrorism
operations there which just
flabbergasted me really yeah it was all
so new 911 had just happened and so we
were caught flat-footed and remember the
terrorists were in Afghanistan they
weren't in Pakistan at least they
weren't supposed to be so I get there my
flight arrives at 4:00 in the
morning so I'm pretty dog on tired and
the driver says listen I'll pick you up
at 7 I said please pick me up at 8
please I'm going to die today with no
sleep he picks me up at 8 takes me in I
go to meet the chief who I had known
vaguely from from the farm and I meet
the deputy chief and um they sit me down
they say here's what we want you to do
first thing is we want you to come up
with a standard operating procedure for
taking down a terrorist safe
house I said that's it that's it I said
you guys don't do this no but we're g to
we're going to start I said
okay I had never taken down a terrorist
safe house before right and not to to
cut you off but why
wouldn't why wouldn't the agency have
the ground Branch guys do that or cuz
the ground Branch guys only know how to
kill people seriously so sorry ground
Branch guys you're great at what you do
but the idea was to take people alive
what about what about okay so Abu we'll
get into this I don't want to get ahead
of it but he was the number three in
al-Qaeda at the time or we believed he
was what what about jok what about one
of the Special Operations unit Why have
a [__] case officer and not to say
that you're not smart and capable you're
completely
correct yes why not because it was chaos
in Washington chaos listen on 9111 as I
was driving back I saw the White House
senior director for Middle Eastern
Affairs walking with no
shoes to try to get to a Subway to get
home that's what kind of chaos there was
in Washington when those
shoes this is number four guy in the
National Security
Council and he's like I better get the
[__] out of here I I don't even have
time to grab my
shoes so John's going to sit down now
with a legal pad and a pen and I
remember actually sitting there like
this thinking okay if I'm going to take
down a terrorist Safe
House how would I do that and I said
well I would want it to be dark I
wouldn't want anybody to see me or at
least not to see me gearing up for it so
I wrote 0200 at the top of the
page and I thought well I need guns and
ammunition bulletproof vests maybe some
night vision
goggles yeah
holsters secure comms walkie talkies at
least so I wrote all this crap
down and uh because I mean you have to
think bureaucratically too 911 is an
open criminal investigation which as
much as it was a punch in my gut to
admit it meant that the FBI had the
lead and this is the Pakistani country
so we need to pretend like they're in
charge so you got to have a team that
included an FBI agent and a
Pakistani right and then you need
surveillance and you need Security on
top of
it so the pakistanis called me and said
hey we have an address we think there
might be somebody at this address I said
okay let's let's do this as a test run
let's meet up at 1:00 at the safe house
we'll go over to the place to the
address at 2:00 we'll bust down the door
and we'll see who's
inside okay it was all practice so it's
me an FBI agent a Pakistani colonel
colonel colonel T who was just the
greatest I love the guy and um and we
had a surveillance and security team
behind us like half a block behind us so
I had had ordered some battering rams we
had we had a battering ram you can just
get them out of the police supply
catalog galls.com
gs.com you can buy anything your heart
desires so uh we go one two three broke
the door down splintered the door we run
in it's these two kids I say kids they
were both 18 years old from Tunisia they
start crying we cough them behind their
back
one's got like snot coming down his nose
one's asking if he can call his mom like
no you can't call your
mom so we take
him and I said to Colonel Tark that was
fraking
easy that was easy it's the element of
surprise he said yeah that
was very easy I said okay well I'm going
to be looking for information you look
for information we'll try it again so
then I got a call
from the station chief of a friendly
Arab
service but this guy he was a general he
was a brigadier general but he was a
brigadier general who wore you know a
leisure suit with a a flower and the
lapel he wasn't interested in getting
his fingernails
dirty so he's like I have this address
I'm like okay I'll take it so I took the
address I said hey got this address told
the packs let's move 2:00 in the morning
we bust down the door we grab some guy
from Egyptian Islamic Jihad now this is
a serious like an aess terrorist group
and he was groggy and it's the middle of
the night and he's like you know who
shot who in the what now that line from
The Simpsons that I love so much and I
said you know we're we're on to
something here if it's going to be this
easy you
know it's just a question of developing
the
intelligence but the element of surprise
is
everything well Egyptian Islamic Jihad
ended up merging with Al-Qaeda and Iman
aahi the number two in al-Qaeda was the
founder of Egyptian Islamic Jihad they
murdered president Sadat uhhuh in
so headquarters is beginning to take
note of these
successes and they said how can we step
this up and I said you know I've got an
idea we've got
officers all the way up and down the
Pakistani Afghan Border in every little
godforsaken village along the
border why it's dangerous for them
there's nobody to protect them we know
that these Al-Qaeda guys are going to
try to get into Pakistan because they
think that it's safer in Pakistan in the
meantime we're bombing the [__] out of
Afghanistan right tor Bora and
everything so they're they're along the
border trying to get into Pakistan I
said let's pull everybody off the Border
let's let them into Pakistan because you
know they're going to make a
mistake and then we raid the safe houses
and we catch everybody at once instead
of one guy here in this Village one guy
there in that Village one guy in this
other Village that's not cost
effective so they said yeah let's try it
so we pulled everybody back and we put
them in you know Pasa rul pendy uh
Islamabad feis labad laor Karachi qua
every major city in
Pakistan and it was a flood of al-Qaeda
that came into Afghanistan or into
Pakistan from Afghanistan a flood and
sure enough what's the first thing they
do they get cell phones and they call
home and we say thank thank you for your
locational information and then we bust
down the door and grab dozens at a
time and then it just got better from
there and this was all happening very
quickly I I'm saying like in this was
all in a matter of like six weeks that
we were able to step up our game to the
point where we were catching so many
people we actually filled the rubble
pendy jail and then had to start moving
them to Regional jails the jail was full
wow MH
so did you go to Pakistan with the
direction of catching Abu AA because no
okay no um I went to
Pakistan with the object being
to do as I was told and to make as big
and as important a contribution as I was
able whether that you know maybe I'm
going to run into Bin Laden in the
vegetable market I'm thinking right and
then six weeks after I got
there I got called in the weekend in
Pakistan was Friday and Saturday
Saturday was the only day I allowed
myself the luxury of sleeping until 8
because you have to work seven days a
week so it's like 6:00 in the morning on
Saturday my phone rings it's the
chief I was like oh man I feel like I
just went to sleep and he says you got
to come in right away something happened
I said bad he said no but come so I
speed over there it was the chief the
Dead deputy chief chief Ops the FBI
Chief and
me and my chief
says
um we got a we got a cable from
headquarters that abuaba is somewhere in
the country and we have to capture him
we have to take him alive everybody
turns and looks at me I'm like great but
in my mind I'm like Abu zubeda that name
sounds vaguely
familiar I went back into my office and
all my Oldtimer contractors were there
these was all old guys in their 60s 70s
some were in their 80s they were all
senior officers who had come back after
911 to volunteer and I said anybody know
who Abu zubeda is and one of them like
yeah I just read a piece about him in
Time Magazine he's the number three in
al-Qaeda I'm like right right that's
where I know that name from I go well we
got to catch him like are you serious I
go yeah he's here somewhere we got to
catch
him so when everybody turned to look at
me I go I go you guys I go this country
is the size of Texas it's got 220
million people what do you mean catch
him you got to narrow it down for me
somehow and one of them says well he's
he's constantly moving which makes it
harder
he's moving
between between lore and
faisalabad well later on the night we
captured him we also captured his diary
and he knew we were looking for him and
so he was one day ahead of us like there
were a couple times where we'd bust into
a place and and there's a cigarette
there that's still lit right or there's
food that's still warm on the table
we're like dang it close again but no
cigar sometimes we were 2 days behind
sometimes we were 15 minutes behind but
he knew we were on him and we're chased
them all over the dog on
Country
so I came up with a couple of just
terrible ideas I won't waste your time
terrible unworkable ideas to try to
tighten the Noose a little bit and just
not no there was no operation that I
could conceive of on my own that was is
going to find
him so I said to the chief listen I need
a I need a targeting analyst so a
targeting analyst is different from the
kind of analysis that I did the the
analysis that I did was was political
and social analysis where you you think
the big thoughts you boil it down to a
page or half page you send it to the
president he reads it thank you very
much a targeting
analyst goes through reams of data
sometimes Millions of pieces of
data a lot of time just metadata so
you're not reading newspaper articles
and classified cables you're just
looking at dots and dashes and ones and
zeros to try to geolocate somebody who
you want to either capture or
kill so I said I've got a buddy at
headquarters who's a a targeting analyst
and and he's really good and I trust him
this this operation was so highly
classified that there were only a
handful of us who
knew not
just that we were going after a senior
alqa
leader but that it was even abuu beta we
never told the pakistanis who it was we
said he was a big fish and so we ended
up calling him Mr fish like we've
located Mr Fish he's he's in this place
but he just left you know we're going to
chase Mr Fish over here we're going to
chase Mr Fish to
P so um
so I I sent an email a classified email
to my my friend and I said dude can you
can you get to Pakistan like right now I
said there's a major operation we'll
read you into it when you get here I
can't tell you who it is but I need your
help and 24 hours later there he is I
picked him up at the airport 4 o'clock
in the morning and he's like what's up
and I said we've got a lead on
abua he's like oh my god you're kidding
me I said no and we're freaking close
but we can't quite get
there and he goes I can find
him so brought him into the uh station
the next day and he signed all the
secrecy agreements we gave him the full
formal briefing and he took a piece a
piece of Butcher Block
paper um that was like the size of a
small American
billboard and
um and he wrote Abu zubeda in the center
and circle cled it and then around
abuaba he
wrote every piece
of information that we
had for people who had been in touch
with abua whether it was by phone by
email or if we had an address which was
a little bit unusual now we had a couple
of addresses but they they were um
travel agencies because he was the
logistics guy for kaaa if you needed a
fake passport and a ticket home he was
the guy that was going to get it for you
he established al-qaeda's House Of
Martyrs um Safe House in Pasa he created
al-qaeda's two training camps in
kahar and helmund uh provinces so he
never actually joined Al-Qaeda but he
was al-qaeda's goto logs
guy
so around that second ring he put a
tertiary ring of everybody who was in
touch with the people who were in touch
with Abu zua and then made connections
between the secondary and tertiary
levels at the end of the week it looked
like a spiderweb it was very pretty like
like
artistic and he comes to me to tell you
the truth I couldn't make heads or Tales
of this thing he had to explain it to me
because it was very
complicated and he said
listen I'm just not able to get this
down to any fewer than 14 sites I said
dude it's not it's not workable we've
never done more than two two raids
before in a single night we can't hit 14
places simultaneously we don't have the
men the men for it he's like I don't
know what to do I just can't get it down
to any fewer than 14 so I cable
headquarters and I'm like I don't know
what to do they said well what do you
need in a perfect world tell us what you
need so I said all right I need I need
people I need $10 million
and I mean intelligence is a cash
business um I need weapons ammunition
battering
rams bulletproof vests helmets
walkie-talkies satellite connectivity
with um with uh scrambling
capability um and we're going to have to
be generous with the pakistanis
mhm I'm telling you within 48 Hours of
had all of it and unmarked 737 lands at
the airport and they just offload
everything so the the Manpower was half
CIA half
FBI I drive down with a colleague I
drive
from from Islam Abad to fisel
Abad and introduce myself to the
pakistanis there
and uh good guys they told me as soon as
I walked in I said gentlemen so nice to
meet you shake hands and uh the guy that
I was assigned to deal with um a
brigadier general General Muhammad he
said your reputation precedes you he
said my instructions are to do anything
you tell me to do I said thank you I
said we're going to have fun it's going
to be
fun and so um he said what do you need
first I said I need a real estate agent
because we need to make some
purchases he said for what I said for
safe
houses big
ones where we can do
interrogations
privately so we bought a 10 bedroom 10B
mansion and we bought a seven bedroom SB
Mansion one in one city one in the
other and I paid cash for both of these
houses
um we bought a
van uh we had all of our equipment we
rented the entire floor of an A-list
Hotel um so we could use that as our
temporary base before we got our safe
houses set
up and we had we had enough weapons and
ammunition to start a war it was
ridiculous
so this all ended up happening very
quickly once we identified the the 14
sites it was just a question of getting
everybody set up it only took but
another two
days and like I say we knew that he knew
that we were on to him and so you know
if I wait too long he might slip back
into Afghanistan he might slip into Iran
which is what two of Bin Laden's sons
did um he might make his way out to
Tajikistan usbekistan we didn't know so
I had to get him while the getting was
good and
so my colleague and I decide to do a dry
run while everybody's you know loading
up and getting their body armor on we're
like fill your bellies drink lots of
coffee we're going to start looking at
the uh the targets so we went to each
one of the 14
targets that day we wanted to look for
Ingress and egress we wanted to make
sure we weren't going into an ambush or
a setup you know if everything sort of
turned to [__] and somebody started
firing at us we wanted to make sure that
we had a way out or we could defend
ourselves while we were looking for a
way
out almost all of these sites were just
one or two room mud Huts or concrete
block HS tin
roofs um one of them was a shishkabob
stand with a pay phone so we cut that
site right away obviously there was
al-Qaeda in the neighborhood and they
were using the pay phone at the
shishkabob stand to make calls but you
can't raid the shishkabob stand at 2
o'clock in the morning it's closed so we
cut that one
then as we were going through the
University of faisalabad campus to get
to the back side of it the analyst
called me and he said listen
I just got a call from a friendly
Western intelligence service and they
said that they had a walk-in a walk-in
is somebody who literally walks in off
the street and says I have intelligence
information I want to give to you but I
want you to pay me for
it 95 out of a hundred times they're
either
lunatics or probes like from the
Iranians just to see how thick the glass
is who has weapons where are the cameras
set up they do that all the time scary
so if they intend to attack the embassy
they know where the vulnerabilities are
yeah it's not good so they're either
lunatics or probes or something called
intelligence Peddlers where they'll go
to the American Embassy and get $100 for
the information then they'll go to the
British the French the Canadians the
this one the that one yeah that that's a
year's salary right there
so he says this Walkin says that there
is a
large brightly painted
house that's full of
al-Qaeda and I said okay I want to talk
to the walk-in he said no can do I
already asked they said he's not
available which led me to believe that
there was no walk-in that it was a
telephone
intercept and they didn't want to admit
to us that it was a telephone intercept
why not cuz they're trying to protect
their own intelligence
equities you know we share our
intelligence with our friends but we
don't share all of our intelligence with
our
friends just as I hung up the phone with
him I was telling General Muhammad and
my other colleague I said that was the
analyst he said there's a big
yellow house and it's right there and
it's full of
al-Qaeda and general Muhammad
says I can tell you right now that
something bad is happening in that house
I said what makes you say that he said
because it has to be
115° right now and all of the blinds are
closed it has to be roasting in
there and I said we need to put a big
team on that
one it turned out that there were more
than two dozen Al-Qaeda fighters in that
house wow hold
up so that night at
10:00 I stood on the coffee table in the
safe house and I said guys it was all
guys except for one I said guys at the
risk of sounding
melodramatic we have to synchronize our
watches like in the movies so we
synchronized our watches right 10:00
check I said here's what we're going to
do everybody's Gonna Leave Here
everybody who's going to feot is going
to leave here by
bus you're going to arrive at
midnight at
01:30 you leave for your Target
site be in the neighborhood by
0155 be in line of sight of the target
0158 get out of the car and exactly at
0200 break down the door and grab
everybody
inside right and I mean to the second
which is why we synchronized our watches
because we don't want them you know
we're five minutes off and so they're
going to call each other the Americans
are coming right you can't risk that
so almost all of the targets were in uh
faisalabad so most of us got on the bus
went to fisel laad everybody else
remained in
lore and
um and my colleague and
I climbed to the roof of the uh Safe
House in F labad and I looked at my
watch and I said 0200 here we go and
just as I said the words we could hear
this sound in the distance boink boink
boink metal on metal
loud and I said that's not good and then
we heard shots fired and I said oh my
God shots fired that's not good and then
the walkietalkie starts
crackling and the guy on the ground's
like shots fired shot fired right well
the
the location that was nearest to us
was the house where earlier in the day
and I've skipped this story we believed
that Abu zua might be in
there do you want me to go back and tell
you how we identified that house yeah
yeah so after the big yellow house we
only had one more site to go
to and the analyst called me back and he
said Abu just Abu Zeda just made a
terrible
mistake he said he downloaded his
voicemail from a landline which you
could do back then you call this number
you press you know star to and you can
listen to your voicemail on a
landline and I said oh my God how could
he make such a such an elementary
mistake he said I don't know but man we
have a physical address I said oh my god
well the physical address was site 14 or
13 as it
became so we rush over there so excited
and it turns out it's an empty field
just an empty
field and I said no no this this has to
be wrong this is a mistake we're sure
that the call came from this site and
general Muhammad says no he said this is
quite common in p
he said whenever a lot is
divided into a legal
subdivision each lot is
assigned a telephone
line even if there's no building on it
and so what poor people do is they'll
climb the telephone pole they'll splice
the telephone wire that's assigned to
the empty lot and they'll run a wire to
their house so they can make calls and
the phone bill goes to the owner of the
lot and I said well how how do we find
out where the wires going because it
looks like Medusa's head up there right
there had to be 500 wires coming out of
that thing he calls this young technical
officer from
isi this kid climbs up the
pole and he goes through the he goes
through the wires you know like this
well sorry and he finds this one wire
and he follows the wire literally down
the pole like this and then down the
alley and he goes it's that house right
there wow and see I got chills again
thinking of it and my buddy and I
high-fived each other cu the night
before he said to
me you think we're going to get
him and I said no I think we're going to
get
somebody but I don't think we're going
to get him he's been too smart so
far
so that night shots fired we race over
to site
13 and it's chaos and man the last thing
I said before everybody got on the bus
is do not shoot
our orders are to take him
alive alive not shot half to
death
so we get there and it's it's it's
Anarchy chaos there's a guy laying in
the street who's clearly dead there's a
guy laying next to him who looks like
he's if he's not dead he's going to be
dead in a couple of minutes and then
there's a guy who is screaming bloody
murder completely soaked in Blood and
I've shown you the pictures I
think so I go I go what happened here
and one of the pakistanis one one of the
packs who was on site a major he said we
got him we got your man I said where
right here and it was the middle guy the
guy who looked like he was going to be
dead in a couple minutes I'm like that
that doesn't look anything at all like
the picture we had a six-year-old
passport
picture I said this guy is 40 lbs
heavier he's clean shaven he has crazy
hair I this guy doesn't look anything
like
him so I I wasn't sure what to do so I
call the analyst I'm like look they they
shot somebody they say it's him I don't
know if it's him it doesn't look like
him at all what do I do he says get me a
picture of his eye I'll run a retinal
scan so I I kneel down on top of him and
I shout if open your eyes and I get back
on the phone I said dude he he's he's
dead or almost dead his eyes are rolled
back in his head and all I can see are
the
Whites so they had shot him in the thigh
the groin and the stomach with an AK-47
he was jumping from the roof of the
house to the roof of the next door house
with these other two guys to try to
escape and this Pakistani policeman shot
all three of them with a name k-47
killed the first one instantly he was
dead before he hit the ground shot the
second guy three times and then shot the
third guy through the
leg so the analyst says get me a picture
of his ear and I never knew that no two
people on earth have the same ears it's
like a
fingerprint so I took a picture of his
ear I plugged the the camera into my
phone cuz phones didn't have cameras
back then I sent it to him he sent it to
headquarters headqu
sends it back to him he calls me and he
says it's him I'm like oh my God so we
Commander this filthy Toyota pickup
truck from this guy who's just happens
to be driving by and we stop him we take
him out we take his pickup truck we
throw Abu Zeda in the back of the pickup
truck and we speed to the hospital
faisalabad international
hospital the worst place place on Earth
that I've ever seen in my
life cats and dogs just walking up and
down the Halls clouds of mosquitoes
feeding on people's open
wounds absolutely disgusting I would
rather be dead than to have to be
operated on and recover in a place like
this so here by now it's like 3:00 in
the
morning and all the Americans come in
dressed as
pakistanis with an Arab who's bleeding
to death from gunshot
wounds and I said to the doctor hey
you've got to save this guy because my
orders were to take him alive and he's
like I don't know what to do oh my God
it's like no you got surgery to do so
get
cracking so they take him
in and we sit down in the waiting room
it's like four of
us well word got around the al-Qaeda
community that we had gotten him and
so these Al-Qaeda guys began driving by
the hospital and just opening fire on
the hospital as they're driving by and
we're hitting the ground and I said to I
said
to excuse me Colonel
Tark I said if they realize how lightly
armed we are
we're
dead can you get a helicopter in here
and he said I think so so he calls 20
minutes later a helicopter lands in the
parking lot so I I put my shirt up over
my mouth and I walked into the operating
room and I said doc wrap it up we got to
go he's in the middle of the surgery
they just sewed him closed as quickly as
they could he's got blood being pumped
into him he's it's spilling out of him
as as quickly as they can pump it
out I said in the book too we were
soaked in blood he was soaked in blood
there's blood pooling on the ground
there's just blood everywhere so we put
them on the
helicopter and we fly to a Pakistani
military base about 50 miles away and uh
and they had a a trauma an eight-bed
trauma unit it was in the form of a a
hub and spokes right so it was
circular there were only like four other
patients there and all of them were
soldiers who had attempted suicide so
this was the only trauma case that they
had and um they rushed him they they
knew we were coming of course so they
rushed him in and then as the doctor's
getting ready he asked to see me so I go
in where he's scrubbing up and he said
listen I've never seen injuries so
severe where the patient lived so you
need to be prepared for this man to die
so I called I called the analyst I'm
like look this doesn't look good so you
might want to tell headquarters that
he's he's probably not going to
live so he was in there for hours in the
meantime the analyst called me back and
he said that the director had called
George
tenant he said George called and said
his only orders for you are 247 CIA eyes
on not FBI not Pakistani
intelligence CIA do not leave his
bedside well I've been up for 24 hours
at this point I'm tired right so I get
some coffee they had a
machine and he comes out of uh
surgery and I'm
thinking I I can't possibly stay awake I
know what I'm going to do so I tear up a
sheet and I tie him to the bed by his
wrists and his
ankles he's naked um because his wounds
needed to be open and exposed you know
to the air and it it
was the most
gruesome thing I've ever seen in
person that's not
true they tried to kill a couple of our
people in Pakistan a couple of weeks
earlier I saw a human head rolling on
the floor that was more gruesome but
anyway you get the idea it was pretty
gruesome so
um I turned the ceiling fan on full
blast to make sure that I stayed a
little bit too cold because I thought if
I get warm I'm going to fall asleep in
the chair and I kept getting up and
walking around and the guy that was shot
in the leg was screaming in the other
room so I went in there and talked to
him and he had had
a he had a story of his own um he was
screaming so I uh I said to him uh kak
how are you and he goes
alhamdulillah right thanks to God and I
said yeah you don't look so good he goes
are you American I said yeah I caught
you and he says the
pakistanis they held me down they put a
rifle against my leg and they shot me I
said that's not what I heard I heard you
were jumping from the roof of the house
to the roof of the next
house and then he gets real serious and
he goes I am 150 kilos 330 lbs I cannot
jump from the
roof so I pull back his blood
soaked
fobe and there was a powder burn the
size of a fraking dinner
plate all the perfect way around his
wound they held that AK-47 right against
his leg yeah and pulled the trigger and
I said well I don't know anything about
that that happened before I got there
all I know is you're in some big trouble
so you have some decisions to make and
then I went back to abuu beta's
room so I sat there just living on
coffee for as it as it turned out I sat
with him for 56 hours 56 hours I I felt
like I was starting to hallucinate at
the end I had been so long without
sleep but a buddy of mine brought
over some food and a change of clothes
which I wrote about um I I smelled so
bad right there's no time to shower
there's no place to shower anyway and
I've been in the same clothes for days
and I haven't slept and we've been out
in the dust and the dirt and so I
smelled bad enough that I was grossing
myself out so he bought me or brought me
I should say a a t-shirt from the safe
house that I slept in normally it was it
was something my kids had gotten me it
was a red t-shirt with SpongeBob
SquarePants in the
center so about 24 hours into
uh his capture AB beta starts coming out
of the
coma and so I'm in the
SpongeBob uh t-shirt I still have the
big poofy Pakistani balloon pants on and
I stood up with my hands on my hips at
the foot of his bed and I was looking at
him and he's laying there tied down and
he looks at me not really at me though
he looks at
SpongeBob and
I say in the book you can see the exact
instant that he realized oh my God the
Americans have me because his pulse went
from 110 to
220 and the Machine starts
going and then you hear code blue code
blue so they run in and then they shock
him and they give him a shot and then
he's out again so I sit back down and I
eat a
little you know those little peanut
butter cheesec crackers that's all I had
so I'm eating my little peanut butter
cheesec
crackers six hours later he comes back
out of it again so he's laying in the
bed like this and he's looking at me and
I'm looking at him he's got an oxygen
mask on and he he Motions like this for
me to come next to him so I go next to
him and I moved his oxygen mask over to
the side and I said to him shme what is
your name and he shakes his head like
this I said
shme and he says to me in perfect
English I will not speak to you in God's
language I said that's okay Abu zua we
know who you are and then he starts to
cry and he says please brother kill me
take the pillow and kill me smother me
and I said oh no no I said nobody's
going to kill you we've been looking for
you for a long
time and he says what's going to happen
to me and I said honestly I don't
know but I'm going to give you some
advice your life is
over and the rest of it can be easy or
it can be
terrible I said my friends they aren't
nice like I am I'm the nicest guy you're
going to meet in this experience so if
you do anything it's that you have to
cooperate he said you seem like a nice
man but you're the enemy and I'll never
cooperate I said suit
yourself the pakistanis were so proud to
have played a role in this that they
began bringing like delegations of
generals to come and look at him
so here he is naked tied down and he
goes I am not a zoo
animal and I said abua
listen you're a big trophy for them
you're the most important person we've
ever
caught they're going to do this but
listen you got to
cooperate you got to
cooperate so we ended up having some
deep
conversations you know I told you
earlier he he had this diary that we
that we captured that
night the CIA and the FBI have very
different ideas of what that book
was um the FBI said oh he's insane it's
the rantings of a Madman it's like on
the contrary he's very very
intelligent what it was was he would
write
poems and then he would draw Doodles
that were quite sophisticated and then
he would and this is why the FBI thought
he was insane he would write letters to
himself as a young man like ABA was 24
and he's writing to himself as a
15-year-old saying Hey listen
15-year-old AB was a beta don't make the
mistakes that I made
that time that such and such happened
you shouldn't have done that think twice
before you do this again you know you
shouldn't have left Saudi Arabia when
you did you shouldn't have gone to
Afghanistan when you did you should have
gone to Jordan instead stuff like
that like I say it was all it was all
very
sophisticated he wanted to he asked me
if I was Christian I said
yes and he wanted to debate Christianity
versus
Islam we didn't really debate it so much
as just talked about it um he he cried a
lot he would never know the touch of a
woman he said he would never know the
joy of fatherhood I said you're not the
victim here I said there were 50,000
people in those Towers what did you
think was going to happen did you really
think that we weren't going to try to
find you to kill you or to kill Bin
Laden what did you think we were going
to do and he said I never wanted to
attack the United States I wanted to
attack Israel all I ever wanted to do
was to kill
Jews I said well you made your bed this
is the way it's going to be and that's
why you have to
cooperate and I would say it at every
opportunity finally I got a call from
one of my colleagues and he said hey
headquarters is sending in a plane
tonight and we're going to put him on
the plane and he's going to go I said
where's he going he he goes I don't have
any
idea so I said abua you're going to be
you're going to be taken out of here and
they're going to send you to someplace
else he said where I said I have no idea
but
again my friends are not nice like I am
you really have to cooperate if you want
to have any remnants of a life
left so he was very upset very
frightened is what it was and he kept
asking what time it was cuz I said the
plane is going to come in and then we
heard the plane
land um it landed I'm going to say it
probably landed around
midnight and
um three FBI agents came in and we
maneuvered him onto a gurnie
and I said we're going to carry you out
and we're going to we're going to put
you on the plane and he asked if I would
hold his hand so with one hand I'm
holding his hand with the other hand I'm
holding the gurnie like a like a coffin
like Paul Bear is at a coffin at a
funeral rather and we carried him out to
the the plane this is a small private
jet that the CIA has so we had to stand
him up physically stand him up to
maneuver him like a piece of furniture
onto the
plane take him to the back and then we
laid him out on the luggage rack at the
back and then tied the the gurnie down
to the lug luggage
rack and he's crying the whole time
blood all over us and he squeezes my
hand and he said um pray for me and I
said you have to
cooperate and that was the last thing I
said to him so as I was getting off the
plane the the staff on the plane it's
something well no I won't I won't say
what it's called it's got a classified
name not the rendition team I guess it's
not classified it's not classified okay
um before we get there yeah sorry to
interrupt you not at
all when he asked you to hold his hand
yeah at the time we believed he was the
number three terrorist in al-Qaeda mhm
um what made you decide to hold his hand
instead of telling him to go [__]
himself yeah is there some sort of
empathy in war that comes out that
nobody discusses great question when he
was still
unconscious I was sitting at the foot of
his bed and I'm just staring at him and
I very clearly remember thinking I
should hate you I should want to kill
you and I don't you're
pathetic you're a kid guy was 24 years
old yeah and when when my colleague came
in to bring the shirt
I go he's a [__] kid and I said dude
this is the this is the Fearsome
Al-Qaeda this is what we've been so
afraid of all this time he's a kid and
he's one of the
leaders that's what it was seeing him
dying bleeding to
death kind of humanized him for me
because I was
thinking you know when we're we rush to
the to the site and he's bleeding and
and the other guy's dead and I'm like we
should just [__] kill them all just
kill them all three of them just kill
them and then I was like no no no no you
can't do that and I'm not a murderer
anyway so we got to the hospital and
then got to the second hospital and I'm
thinking this this is
pathetic yeah it just like any hatred I
had hatred of really what was the
unknown for me
dissipated in that hospital room that's
so
interesting um so so yeah the rendition
team it's obviously it's it's not
obviously but it's not classified um can
you describe can you describe the scene
of handing him off to them yeah what
they were wearing yeah so it's a team
and what they do sure this is a team of
uh of six people they um they're wearing
all black black pants uh black shirts
black hoods black everything black
gloves everything is black all you can
see is little slits with their
eyes and um one of them says John what
are you doing here I I go who are you
and he lifts up his mask and it was my
last boss at headquarters oh wow cuz
when 911 hit we all went we scattered to
the winds everybody everybody in the
whole agencies working on Al-Qaeda now
so we we I hadn't seen him since
9/11 so he goes what are you doing here
and I said uh I'm the I'm the chief of
counterterrorism Ops I go what are you
doing here he said I came to take your
prisoner and um I go where are you
taking him he goes oh man I'm sorry um
you don't have a need to know I said oh
yeah sorry sorry and he goes well who is
this guy anyway and I said oh man I'm
sorry you don't have a need to know and
we both laughed because it was true I
wasn't read into his compartment it was
none of my business where they were
taking him and his job was to deliver
the prisoner from point A to point B not
to know who the prisoner was and what
his background was he's a delivery man
and so we laughed hugged each other I
got off the plane and then uh over the
next couple of
days we
uh shuttered things down and transferred
all the weapons and the gear and most of
it we just donated it to the
pakistanis and uh and I went back to
Islamabad so it's now summer of what 02
at this time you go back home yep IA
goes to his first black site which we'll
certainly come back to um so you get
home that
summer
and what was your involvement in or how
did how did the planning for the Iraq
War come
about
so in CTC in the counterterrorist center
everybody was so excited about ABAB beta
I went home it was so funny my first day
back in the
office I uh I punch in the combination
to get into the The Vault and I open the
door and I walk in and what the Vault oh
uh every every office in the CIA is like
a bankful okay okay so you need
combinations sometimes multiple
combinations to get in cuz they're all
secure areas so I do my combination to
get in I walk in and a couple of the
guys see me and one of them goes like
this and I said no no no it was a team
effort he's like dude you're my hero I
said no no no and my boss uh comes out
he's like oh my God you're a legend and
see I didn't know know anything that was
happening at headquarters I was so busy
in Pakistan and he goes um the deputy
director wants to see you I said really
Jim pavit yeah I said cool glad I wore a
tie so I go up to uh to Pav's office and
he said I just want to shake your hand
thank you for what you did in Pakistan
and he said uh we want to offer you a
new position we want you to be chief of
Counter Intelligence in the um in Alex
station the Osama Bin Laden unit so this
was a job that put me in charge of
trying to root
out Al-Qaeda
moles trying to
identify CIA officers it's a fraking
hard job let me tell
you I only did that for six weeks
because my station Chief in
Pakistan on the strength of the abuaba
capture was promoted to associate deputy
director for
operations
so he calls me and he says you need a
job I said actually no I just got a job
they put me in charge of Counter
Intelligence for uh Alex station and he
said yeah well they just made the me the
associate deputy director and he said I
want you to come up to the seventh floor
and be an executive assistant I said oh
done done Jose Rodriguez was so mad at
me he never forgave me me for
that he actually passed me over for
promotion he said I displayed a shocking
lack of commitment to counterterrorism
can you imagine because I left the
counterterrorism office to go up to the
executive
floor so I didn't care and then the
deputy director uh promoted me anyway
over Jose's
objections
so my first day on the job was the
following Monday and I go and I said
okay so what are we doing and he says I
actually can't tell you you have to go
to this room on the sixth floor and
there are some secrecy agreements for
you to sign and then we'll tell you what
we're
doing and I said okay so I went to the
sixth floor and knocked on the door and
I knew the guy who told me to come in
and I said oh hey what are you what are
you doing he said so you're the new
executive assistant wow you've made a a
heck of a a heck of a path for yourself
I said yeah I got lucky Pakistan was
totally
positive um I said what are we doing and
he said well why don't you sign these
first and then I'll explain everything
so there were six of them and I signed
six secrecy agreements saying I'll never
ever reveal what I'm about to learn
unless it's Declassified which it has
been and so I sign I go go okay what's
up and he goes well now this is this is
May of
2002 he goes well next year in February
we're going to invade Iraq we're going
to overthrow Saddam Hussein and we're
going to open the largest Air Force Base
in the world so that we can move all of
our air assets out of Saudi Arabia
and deprive Osama Bin Laden of the
ability to say that we're polluting the
land of the two holy
mosques I was
dumbfounded and all I could even blur
out was but we haven't caught Benin Len
yet and he said buddy the decision's
been made and the battle lines have been
drawn he said he said CIA is opposed to
this state is opposed to this and The
Joint Chiefs are opposed
but the ones that are for it are ovp the
office of the vice president OSD the
office of the Secretary of Defense and
the National Security
Council and I said so the decision's
been made he said the decision's been
made yeah so I walk back
downstairs and the boss
says so you're read in and I said are
they out of their
minds and he said yes they
are but we're not a policy agency we're
a support agency and if they tell us to
invade Iraq and overthrow Saddam Hussein
that's what we're going to do and so
that's what we worked on until we
invaded Iraq and overthrew Saddam
Hussein so Tennant was the director at
this time right yes and uh didn't you I
don't know if it was the same day or not
but walk by his office and see him doing
a little project in there oh it wasn't
tenant okay I went up to the uh it was
the chief of something called the Iraq
operations
group um I had to pick up a briefing
book uh there was a principal's meeting
a the principal meeting it's it's a
policy meeting chaired by the Vice
President um and it has the Secretary of
Defense Secretary of State National
Security
adviser um CIA director NSA director and
chairman and vice chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of
Staff so I went to pick up the
book and
uh and the chief of the Iraq operations
group he's sitting there with a piece of
paper and he's got these
Crayola um what do you call them the
Crayons no not the crayons but the magic
markers I go what are you doing he says
oh I'm designing the new Iraqi
flag I said don't you think the Iraqis
should design the new Iraq
flag he goes I don't know I thought I'd
do it and I said you're using the colors
of the Israeli
flag like this is what happens when they
put a Mexican guy in charge of the Iraq
operations group I said buddy the Iraqi
flag is is the colors that it is for a
reason right you got to have green
because it represents Islam you have to
have red because it represents the
ethnic minorities right you got to have
the three stars cuz that represents uh
the the sunnis the Shia and the
Kurds you can't just take the Israeli
flag and change it around a little bit
so thank God nothing ever came of that
but they were
serious it it got worse than that that
was minor it got way worse than that how
so people just getting too big for their
Bridges well the day before the day
before we actually crossed the order um
there was a final it's called an order
of battle meeting I always hated the
order of battle meetings because I'm not
a military analyst and I just don't care
where elements of the Fifth Army Corps
are in comparison to the third infantry
division I don't
care right let the generals figure that
out I trust in their judgment you don't
have to tell me that the the 23rd
infantry mounted division is I I don't
care
so George asked me to be the notetaker
in this meeting George tenant the
director of the CIA asked me to to be
the
notetaker and
um the meeting was chaired by the Vice
President so it was Cheney and his guys
like scooter Libby and a couple of other
people coni rice Colin Powell um the
chairman and vice chairman of the Joint
Chiefs Don Rumsfeld
ki's Deputy um Hadley Steve Hadley Steve
Hadley I couldn't remember his first
name he was there and then General I
forget his name he was commander of
centcom at the time he had replaced uh
you know schwarzkoff and [__] and all
these other people that had come after
schwarzkoff General was it Taylor Maybe
Taylor can't remember anymore so starts
the meeting General why don't you give
us the order of battle I'm
like so I'm
sitting George is at George is at the
head of a conference room table and
everybody else is on a TV screen
right and George's microphone is right
in front of him and he's just sitting
there like this and I'm sitting directly
behind his right
shoulder taking the
notes so we're sitting there there and
they're like the Fifth Army Corps is in
this position and the 23rd infantry is
here and they're going to move north and
this one's going to move west and this
one's going to come South and the blah
blah blah blah blah and I'm writing it
all down and then the general
says if all goes as planned we can be in
teron by August George is sitting there
and then he leans forward and turns off
his microphone and he says did he say
Baghdad or did he say
Teran and I said he said
Teran and George says have these people
lost their
minds and then he turns the microphone
back on and just
sits so I'm taking all the
notes and one of these idiots from the
NSC says when we cross the border
they're going to throw flowers at us and
I wrote it down
the meeting ends I go back to the deputy
director's office he said ow' the
meeting go and I said did you know we
were going to invade Iran and he goes oo
are they still talking about
that and I go yeah they said we could be
in Iran by by August and he goes
listen we're not invading
Iran we're probably not even going to be
successful in
Iraq but these guys don't know anything
anything about the Middle East
nothing we're not going to invade Iran
they talk about it like they they think
they know what they're talking about and
they don't know
anything I go okay I I hope you're right
and sure enough we got bogged down in
Iraq never never went anywhere near Iran
mhm so like you said this is right in
the middle of the global war and Terror
yep right smack in the middle of it the
focus is on Bin Laden and Al-Qaeda
um tenant is not psyched about Iraq
right but the direction to Mu forward is
coming from Cheney and few other folks
that you just mentioned um there was
somebody who
was feeding Cheney uh information to
substantiate those claims that Sadam had
wmds that's right chelby Ahmed chelby
who was
he oh I always hated this guy from the
minute I met him I was like this guy is
a dirty used car salesman ah chelby was
a an Iraqi Shia Muslim kurd which made
him one of like a half of 1% of the
Iraqi population he left Iraq as a child
in
1964 his parents fled to Jordan and
chelby went to school in London and
became quite a prominent Banker but he
was also a crook and a
criminal and so he he opened a bank in
Jordan that was specifically meant to
cater to the needs of Iraqi
refugees in fact it was a Ponzi scheme
and he stole all their money by one
account $36 Million worth of deposits he
escaped in the trunk of his secretary's
car across the border into Syria and
then from Syria made his way to
London in Jordan they filed charges
against him and found him guilty in
absentia and and sentenced him to 30
years in prison but chelby was able to
convince the neocons in the Republican
party that he was the only person who
could unite Iraq and that he should be
the president of Iraq and that the
United States should install him as the
president of Iraq so after the first
Gulf
War the George HW Bush Administration
said hey we should take a look at this
guy chelby well those of us at the CIA
who knew chelby were writing until our
fingers were raw saying this is a huge
mistake this guy is a criminal he's
going to rob Us blind he's a liar he's
making it all up and then the money that
we began to funnel to the Iraqi National
Congress which was this exiled Iraqi
opposition group that celby headed began
to
disappear and finally when 6 million
million dollar of the cia's money
couldn't be accounted for the CIA issued
something called a Burn Notice against
chelby forbiding any CIA officer
anywhere in the world from having any
contact with chelby you're burned you're
done well what chelby did was he
increased the level of his relations
with the Republican
Party
saying if those lefties like George HW
Bush
uh won't have Me Maybe the dick chenies
of the world will well after the Clinton
Administration was done and George W
bush won and Dick Cheney is the vice
president and Don Rumsfeld is the
Secretary of
Defense they like what Chene is
providing Chene is giving them this
intelligence that is everything they
want to hear Sadam has wmds Saddam is
going to use wmds against the United
States Saddam is going to launch an
attack on Kuwait again saddam's going to
attack the Saudis saddam's going to
attack the American Military Base in
Jordan or the American Military Base in
Turkey none of this stuff was true he
was just making it up so we went to
Cheney and we said look this guy is a
known liar he's a known fabricator he's
a thief and everything he says is
unreliable so what they did is they told
chelby to start reporting
through the US defense attache in
Aman so we started getting these
classified cables called
doirs Department of
Defense intelligence reports yeah and
they're like weapons of mass destruction
were found at such and such coordinates
and we're like oh my God what's the
source of this report so I'd call over
the Pentagon hey I'm looking at doir 123
4 five who's the source we're not at
Liberty to share that with you what what
do you mean I'm the CIA you got to share
it with me it's a particularly sensitive
Source we're like [__] this is
chelby so we put out the word in the
rest of the intelligence Community you
can't you can't listen to any of these
doirs it's all made up but that was the
information that the Pentagon used to
justify the attack on Iraq it was all
fake now to make matters worse the
Germans came to us and said hey we've
got a source a really sensitive Source
called
curveball and this guy can give us the
kitchen sync on your Rocky wmd we're
like okay like what they start sending
us these classified reports top secret
classified reports they've got
biological weapons they have chemical
weapons they have nuclear weapons
they've got a long range delivery system
we're we're like oh my god well this is
exactly what we feared but this isn't
chelby right they said no no no we don't
deal with chelby this is this is a
special source that we have from Germany
top
secret we said okay we want to meet him
nope can't meet him he's so sensitive
only we Germans can meet him we said
okay then we want to meet him with you
and we want to polygraph him
nope we've already ensured that he's
telling the
truth we're like okay well we're
thinking of like actually going to war
based on this guy's information so
you're
sure that this curveball is telling the
truth we're sure
100% so we assigned an analytic unit to
the information and some of the meetings
they had I was afraid it would come to
fisticuffs like I believe it I don't
believe it I know more than you no you
don't I was there in the
beginning it's like guys please please
you know it's not worth fighting
over in the end curveball um was a
dishwasher in a Shish Kebab
Restaurant um who just went to the
Germans and said I've I I'm am an Iraqi
uh scientist yeah yeah that's it I'm a
scientist and I have weapons of mass
destruction information uh I'd like to
give to the the CIA sure and they were
like oh okay like what so he would go
through the newspapers and read all the
stuff and then he would write notes and
he would tell the Germans listen this is
what I found out Saddam Hussein he's got
all this stuff 100% I just confirmed it
through my special Source at the weapons
of mass destruction Department
at the Iraqi
government the whole thing was made up
American lives were lost because of this
he said he did it because he wanted to
immigrate to the United States and this
was what we wanted to hear anyway so he
thought if he gave us enough
information even if it was just from the
newspapers we would make him an American
citizen
curveball one of the greatest
intelligence failures in modern CIA
history um there was another thing too
the the yellow cake uranium claims
yeah yeah so we had a case officer named
Valerie PL
um Valerie was married to uh to a state
department officer
um uh his name is escaping me now
anyway he was the deputy chief of
mission in uh Baghdad when we still had
diplomatic relations with the
Iraqis and then he became ambassador to
nir and
so so it came time for the State of the
Union Address and um the CIA always gets
a chop on this on the uh State of the
Union they always send it to us about 4
days before the president delivers it
and we make whatever changes we deem
necessary so in the State of the Union
Address it said that the Iraqis had
asked the government of ner to provide
them with yellow cake uranium they they
mine uranium in in niir for the purpose
of building a nuclear
weapon that just wasn't
true
so George tenant said you know what I've
got a case officer who's married to the
former ambassador to
niir how about if I ask him go to ner
and ask the Nigerians if this actually
happened so he goes out there what the
heck's his
name he just died of a heart attack a
couple of years
ago I forget now but anyway he flies out
to niir talks to them they're like what
no no Iraqis come here and ask us for
yellow C yellow cake and even if they
had we wouldn't have sold it to them he
comes back tells the CIA it's just not
true the CIA tells everybody else it's
just not true then he writes an oped in
the Washington Post saying I just got
back from ner I was the Ambassador there
this is the rumor the rumor is not
true
so Dick Cheney was so
[Music]
enraged that they would call him on the
carpet like this
that he had the deputy secretary of
state um leak Valerie pl's name
to
um a syndicated columnist uh
Novak who said oh Joe Wilson Joe Wilson
is his name Joe Wilson nobody knows Joe
Wilson's wife works for the CIA and the
CIA doesn't want to fight Iraq so
they're covered up for the
Iraqis well now Valerie PL can never
travel again she can never take an
overseas assignment ever again she's
been outed in the media and so her
career is done done just like
that um they did it on purpose nobody
was ever prosecuted for it uh scooter
Libby was prosecuted for lying about it
after the fact but nobody was ever
prosecuted for leaking her
name and
um and the next thing we know
the yellow cake accusation is back in
the State of the Union
Address so I happen to be at CIA
headquarters at like 10:00 the night
before the state of the union and I went
in to read my cables because I'd get
like 10,000 cables over the weekend hard
copy in addition to the 20,000 I had to
read electronically and I had to get
through them so I would go in Sunday
nights I go in and there's Colin poeny
sitting at the C at the uh conference
room table
so I said to the uh to the duty officer
what's pal doing here and she goes I
don't know he's he's doing something
with the State of the Union I was like
okay so I do my business and and I
leave and the next day the State of the
Union Address I'm sitting there on the
couch with my wife who was also a senior
Cia
officer and George W bush says we know
that the Iraqi government sent an
emissary to ner to purchase yellow cake
uranium to make a nuclear weapon and we
were like are you kidding
me like how many times do we have to
debunk this story but the point was that
they didn't want it debunked they were
looking for reasons to go to war with
Iraq and they couldn't find any reasons
so they just made them up that's what it
came down to
yeah so um in 20 two after the Abu beta
raid you go home and he goes to a black
site mhm what are black
sites oh very simply put a black site is
a secret prison and when I say secret I
mean it's really secret to the point
where in many cases the presidents or
prime ministers of the countries in
which they were located didn't know that
they existed there these were handshake
deals between the director of the CIA
and the director of whatever that
country's intelligence service was often
times they were on military bases
sometimes abandoned military bases and
so the politicians were just completely
cut
out but the reason why they were secret
black sites is so prisoners could be
tortured there and nobody would
know yeah so at what point do you find
out about the Anan interrogation program
well I was back at headquarters in
uh May of 2002
and I was in the
cafeteria and a a friend of mine from
the counterterrorism center came up to
me and said very offhandedly hey I'm so
glad I ran into you I meant to ask do
you want to be certified in the use of
enhanced interrogation techniques and I
had never heard that term before I said
what's that mean he goes we're going to
start getting rough with these guys and
I said well what does that mean and he
said well we're going to do and he
listed these 10 techniques water
boarding and sleep deprivation and you
know smack in the face and all these
different kinds of
things I said that sounds like a torture
program to me and he goes no it's not
torture the president approved it and
the justice department approved it and
we're gonna we're going to start on
it I said I I don't know I I think I
have a problem with that let me think
about it for an hour so I went back up
to the seventh floor there was a very
senior Cia officer up there who I had
worked for 10 years earlier and I said
hey I just got approached and asked if I
wanted to be certified in these enhanced
interrogation techniques what do you
think of that and he said first of all
let's call a spade a spade this is a
this is a torture program and you know
how these guys are he says somebody's
going to go overboard and they're going
to kill a prisoner and when that happens
there's going to be a congressional
investigation and then a Justice
Department investigation and somebody's
going to go to prison you want to go to
prison and I said no I don't want to go
to prison so I went back downstairs I
said this is a torture program I want
nothing to do with it so they asked 14
people and I'm sorry to say that I was
the only one who said no two of us said
no in the beginning and then one changed
his mind but I was the only one in the
end that said no I'm glad I did in
retrospect I was right they were wrong
but uh but things got much much worse
before they got any better how
so well they started torturing obser on
the second of of
August 2002 and it was a slippery slope
um they did many many many things not
just to abuaba but to to most if not all
of our high value uh prisoners that were
never authorized by the justice
department or by the president you know
you can't force hummus upside someone's
rectum for
example right you can't play Russian
roulette with them you can't you know
they learned up Wasa had an irrational
fear of insects and so they put him in a
coffin and they dumped a box of
cockroaches in there with him and then
closed the coffin and they left him in
there for 10 days just with a diaper you
can't do that nobody told you you had
permission to do something like
that you know and waterboarding was
supposed to be the
ultimate
technique but there were a couple that
were that were clearly worse than
waterboarding uh sleep deprivation
right we know from the American
Psychological Association which is done
studies on this kind of thing that
people begin to go insane at seven days
with no sleep they begin to die of organ
failure with N9 days without sleep
the CIA was authorized to keep prisoners
awake for 12
days people died from sleep deprivation
another one was something called the
cold cell where they strip a prisoner
naked they chain you to an eyebolt in
the ceiling so that you can't sit or lay
or get comfortable in any way they chill
your cell to 50° fah and then every hour
somebody goes in and throws a buck of
ice water on you we murdered two
prisoners with that technique that was
never approved as a technique you know
so we did all kinds of stuff there was
another thing a technique that was that
was considered to be kind of a mild no
big deal kind of thing called
Walling
where they they roll up a towel and put
it around your neck and then they shove
you into a wall right well the wall
it's a what do you call it fiber board
piece of plywood piece of plywood
whatever there's there's a little bit of
give and they have the towel so that you
don't get
Whiplash but they never used a towel
they never used anything around the neck
and it wasn't a plywood wall it was a
concrete block wall and now we have for
example Muhammad atar the nephew of khik
Muhammad who was slammed so mercilessly
against the wall that he's now brain
damaged to the point where he can't
participate in his own defense M they
gave him permanent lifelong brain
damage where does it say you were
authorized to do
that so it really was a slippery slope
and nobody was ever punished nobody will
ever be called to account um just uh
just recently we're filming this in in
early September um the last week of
August of
2023 uh the defense department admitted
that they cannot try Ramsey bin aib one
of the the 911 uh co-conspirators they
cannot try him because he's insane he's
clinically insane why is he insane
because of sleep deprivation do you
think that's [__] though no because
this is the pentagon's psychiatrist
who's saying he's insane not his defense
attorneys huh yeah yeah I guess it goes
back to your point before about you know
you Consulting your higher up at at the
agency and he said you know listen
somebody's going to go overboard M
um and yeah I read I read uh Jim
Mitchell's book who was the Air Force
psychologist that with Bruce jesson
designed correct the AIT program and I
and I guess the towel around the neck uh
was supposed to be some sort of
pavlovian conditioning where just the
feel of the towel going around the neck
much of it was supposed to be pavlovian
yes it they called it learn
learned helplessness that's what it was
learned helplessness so all they would
have to do is roll up the towel and the
Prisoner would just crumple
yeah so I guess it's worth just um
giving some context to The Listener as
to why these things were even done in
the first place right so the reason why
they were done is something called the
ticking Time Bomb scenario the ticking
Time Bomb
scenario is
you've just
captured let's say
abua and you know that Al-Qaeda is
planning something big because Osama Bin
Laden said he was planning something
that would dwarf 911 right and you've
got to get the information before the
bomb goes off so you say hey I was a
beta give me the information he's like
[__] you I'm not going to give you the
information so what do you do
do you waterboard him do you sleep
deprive him do you put him in a cold
cell do you beat him do you put
cockroaches on him do you put hummus up
his ass what do you
do now the problems with that are
severalfold first of all all of it's
illegal secondly there really is no such
thing as the ticking Time Bomb that's
only in the movies it's never happened
in real life it just doesn't besides
even if it did happen when you're
torturing somebody they give you
everything they think you want to hear
just to get you to stop torturing them
and so then it's going to take six
months for the analyst to sort through
it to figure out what's true and what's
[__] you know and by then the bomb's
gone off
anyway and again we're either going to
be the international you know shining
Beacon of Hope for human rights and
civil rights and civil liberties or
we're not yeah but we we can't have it
both ways uh I mentioned a few minutes
ago uh Ramsey b a ship being declared
insane even if he had been declared
sane nothing that he said can be used
against him at trial because the CIA
tortured it out of him nothing that KH
shik Muhammad said nothing that Abu
zubeda said or that or that abdes said
none of it can be used against them in
trial so so what do we do we continue to
hold them illegally without charge or we
let him go the bottom line here is the
CIA royally [__] this
up and that's why every time the CIA
would start to torture prisoners every
time Mitchell and jessen were put in
charge of the interrogation sessions at
the black sites every FBI FBI person in
the country would
leave the FBI didn't even want to be in
the same country where this torture was
taking place yeah you know like I say it
kills me to complement the FBI but they
were right and the CIA was wrong and
here we are 22 years after 911 literally
no one has been prosecuted for that
crime no one yeah nor will anyone be
prosecuted because the CIA ensured that
no prosecutions could be carried
out ironically you're the only one that
went to prison for one that went to
prison yeah so last thing on this and
I'm just playing a little bit of Devil's
Advocate here because I think it's
important to listen to All arguments
like I would I would like to have you in
here just as I would like to have Jim
Mitchell in here Jose Rodriguez sure and
decide for myself and I hope the
listeners do the same I agree and I'm
just I I I can't help but think about
September 12th man
and I there's a quote in tenant's book
where he says something along the lines
of all major foreign policy decisions
after 9/11 were viewed through the prism
of smoke from the World Trade Center in
the Pentagon absolutely true so when I
think about the intent of Jose Rodriguez
of Jim Mitchell of Bruce jessen um I
think about hindsight being 2020 the
ticking Time Bomb situation frantically
trying to save American lives when
everybody was running around like a
[__] chicken with their head cut off
when you look back and you think about
the enhanced interrogation program what
role does intent play for
you I I believe that all of the people
that you mentioned um had good
intentions I think that this points to a
bigger problem at the CIA where you put
sociopaths in positions of authority
where they come to believe that they're
Above the Law and that because they're
the good guys they can and should do
anything that they want to do
but I'm I'm confident that Jose
Rodriguez thinks he's the good guy and
that James Mitchell and Bruce jesson
think they're the good
guys no doubt in my
mind um at the same
time when there's a program that is as
controversial and as potentially
dangerous as the EIT program you need
some way to put the breakes on it we
already know that the Congressional
oversight system doesn't work it just it
just doesn't you can't have 12 staffers
on Capitol Hill overseeing an agency of
25 or 30,000 people you just can't it
doesn't work um at the same time the the
oversight committees have been Have
Become nothing but cheerleaders for the
CIA rather than than the breaks on out
ofc control CIA policies M and you know
when it comes to things like open
Criminal
investigations the CIA needed to swallow
its pride and defer to the FBI and they
just wouldn't they wouldn't do it and a
lot of that was because of of a guilty
conscience of having fallen asleep at
the switch and allowed night 11 to take
place in the first
place
but you know the torture program nothing
good came out of it literally
nothing um you went to Guantanamo in
2002 can you say what you're in
there it was an interim
assignment
um I was a big star after I was beta one
of the monkey mucks came up and said
listen we've got a an underlap uh do you
want to be Chief in Guantanamo for for a
little while and I said I've never been
to Cuba I'd love to go to Cuba so it's
summertime it's pretty hot I said okay
I'll go so I went just filled in for for
somebody until a permanent uh Chief was
named what was that like being over
there hot yeah and one of the things
that that's striking about Guantanamo
and I would I would guess that this is
probably still the
case is no one has any idea of what the
the other guy is
doing right like I'm used to working
with people from a whole bunch of
different agencies like hey FBI guy how
you doing buddy hey hey DEA guy keep up
the good work oh you're the ATF guy we
should have a beer sometime you know
that's what that's how it is in every
Embassy like
Guantanamo you're walking past somebody
you put your head
down like who's he I don't know and I'm
not telling him who I am and all that
guy knows is those buildings over there
don't go over there
that's what do they call it OG another
government uh other government agency
they don't even like to say the letters
CIA they just say
OG yeah don't go over to that side and
then like you can hear people screaming
over there yeah it's not
good and then the agency's like oh our
mistake wrong guy we'll clear him for
release and then he'll be released in
five to seven years when the state
department can find a country that's
willing to take him
yeah um unfortunately we don't have time
to get into that I want to get you out
of here at a reasonable hour because I
know you got places to be but um the
Brian Ross interview yes December of
2007 how did that come
about Brian Ross from ABC News called me
out of the blue I had never met him I
had never spoken to him called me and
said that he had a source who said that
I had tortured Abu zua I said that was
absolutely false I said I was the only
person who was kind kind to abuaba I had
never tortured abua I had never tortured
anybody else I never laid a hand on
anybody oh he says well you're welcome
to come on the show and defend yourself
I didn't know that that was a reporter's
trick well in the in the subsequent days
uh President Bush gave a press
conference in which he looked right in
the camera and he said we do not torture
like that and I said to my wife he is a
bald-faced liar he's looking the
American people in the in the eye and
he's lying to
us and then a couple of days after
that he is walking from the south
Portico of the White House to the
helicopter to fly to Camp David and a
reporter shouts a question about torture
and he turns and he says well if there
is torture it's a rogue CIA
officer and I said to my wife Brian
Ross's source is at the White House and
they're going to blame me for this
so I called Brian Ross and I Saidi give
you your interview and I decided that no
matter what he asked me I was going to
tell the truth and so the rest is
history I said that the CIA was
torturing its prisoners I said that
torture was official US government
policy it was not a rogue and I said the
policy had been personally approved by
the president himself anything else was
a
lie and so you said during that
interview as well um a couple things um
I don't I don't want to quote you
obviously you'll remember but um just a
few things along the lines of we got
information from those high value
detainees that disrupted future attacks
yes um and that was not true right so
what I was going to ask is that's
contrary to what you're saying now so
what what happened for for you to change
your stance was it new information oh
yeah um the CIA Inspector General
released a 2005 report in
2009 that just sends chills up my
spine so an FBI agent by the name of Ali
sufan was interrogating Abu zua and the
way the FBI does it is and they've been
doing this since the nurmberg trials in
1946 they establish a rapport with the
prisoner a relationship you offer him a
cigarette you offer him an orange you
know you let him write a letter to his
mom and eventually he'll open up to you
and that's what happened with abua um
abua gave us actionable intelligence
through Ali sufan that gave us KH
Muhammad's identity identity which we
did not know we only knew him as MTAR
which was his
n and he gave us the al-Qaeda wiring
diagram which we also never had any idea
of but Mitchell and Justin were so
intent on implementing this this torture
program that they they took over from
the FBI the FBI withdrew from the secret
site and they started torturing Mitchell
and Justin started torturing abua abua
immediately clammed up now at the time
the FBI and the CIA did not have
compatible computer systems we hated
each other so much we didn't even have
compatible computer systems post 9911
yeah and so Ali's doing these
interrogations and he's writing up the
results of the interrogations and
sending them to the FBI which is not
sharing them with anybody
else not even with the agency nope not a
word then Mitchell and J take over they
torture up AA he goes completely silent
but they can't say you know uh the CIA
paid us $08 million and we blew it and
he's not saying anything so what they
did is they took Ali's cables that he
had written they retyped
them in the CIA computer system and said
oh my god look what abua said we
waterboarded him one time and look at
all this stuff he gave us he says khik
Muhammad is MTAR and he gave us the
wiring diagram for AA look at this now
when I read this cable I was like oh my
God I said to one of my colleagues Maybe
I'm Wrong I still think it's immoral and
probably illegal but but it looks like
it's actually
working well it wasn't working they were
lying and Reporting back to headquarters
everything that had already been
reported back to FBI headquarters but
reporting it as new information that
they got from abuaba thanks to the EIT
program none of that was true but we
didn't know that until the Inspector
General reported it internally in 2005
and then Declassified the report in
2009 it's a
crime making a false statement is a is a
felony MH and every time they started
typing they were committing a
felony I had not heard that before
today so one last thing on on the ABC
interview um your entire time with the
agency you're trained to lie you're out
at this point by the way you retired in
04 right uh yeah and this is an ' 07 um
what was it like to get on naal
television and tell the truth about all
the way up to President Bush you know
the next day President Bush said these
were his exact words I don't know this
man I don't know this man's motiv
motivation I don't know why this man
threw me under the bus is this a public
statement
uhhuh it's like well because you
approved a torture program it's actually
rather
simple
um i s deely
underestimated the entire
experience I had never spoken to a
journalist before in my life I had no
media training no nothing no guidance
nothing I had the truth on my side or at
least what I believed to be the truth at
the
time um but I just decided the easiest
way to get through this is just to be
honest and so I did I I assumed this was
going to be a tough pill for the agency
to
swallow um I didn't realize how
dedicated some senior Cia officers with
whom I had disagreed over the years
would be um with the goal
of ruining the rest of my life right um
I should have considered that but the
only thing I would have done different L
was I would have had an attorney sitting
next to me when I did the interview it's
the only thing I would have done
differently I would have said the same
things yeah the truth is I I waited I
waited for what three and a half years
for somebody to come out and say
something right because I was certainly
not the only guy objecting to the
torture program dozens of people were
objecting there were there were dozens
who resigned rather than than to to
carry out these torture techniques um
but nobody said anything and then
finally after three and a half years now
they're going to blame me for the
torture program Over My Dead
Body so it was time to let it out so
what was the crime what did you
eventually go to prison for well they
charged me first with three counts of
Espionage for speaking to ABC News and
the New York Times I hadn't committed
Espionage right and so all of those
charges were
dropped what they got me on was I got a
call from an author who was writing a
book about about uh the rendition of a
an Egyptian cleric named Abu Omar is
this Matthew Cole yeah Matthew Cole it's
worth noting real quick that he also
wrote the uh the hitpiece on SEAL Team
Six yeah Matthew Cole is
uh you know what I'm just going to stop
there because otherwise we're going to
end up in court fair
enough Matthew Cole Matthew Cole has
Matthew Cole's actions have led to the
incarceration of five whistleblowers
five I honestly believe in my heart that
Matthew Cole's work as a journalist is a
cover that he is either in the employ of
the FBI or or somehow under the control
of the
FBI nobody's that stupid nobody is that
careless you're a national security
correspondent and your tradecraft is so
bad that that your reporting has led to
the incarceration of five National
Security
whistleblowers how's that possible
wasn't there a picture of someone on the
on the redition team that ended up in a
Cell one of the cells of the terrorist I
don't know who that was um it was more
than one it was a
dozen
um Matthew Cole emailed me and he said
hey I'm writing this book on Abu Omar do
you know any of these 12 people you can
introduce me to I said I don't know who
these people are he sends me a second
email what about these 12 I'd like to
interview them for my book I said look
you clearly know this issue better than
me better than I do I I'm I was not I
was not into kidnapping at the agency
kidnapping wasn't my
thing um I said you you know the issue
better than I do I I can't help you he
said what about the guy that you refer
to in your
book uh I think his name is John and I
go in my response I said Oh you mean
John
Doe I said I don't know he's probably
retired and living in Virginia
somewhere but what I did in that email
was I confirmed his last
name and that's what they got me on
because Matthew Cole was not writing a
book about Abu Omar he was pretending to
write a book about Abu om AR and in fact
he was secretly working for the
Guantanamo defense attorneys so they
took John Do's name and they put it in a
a classified motion and asked the judge
to allow them to uh depose him the judge
recognized the name as being classified
and turned it over to the FBI the FBI
went
to Human Rights Watch and said where'd
you get this name and they saidwe got it
from Matthew cole' so they went to
Matthew Cole where'd you get this name I
got it from John
kiraku and then they arrested me charged
me with five felonies including three
counts of Espionage like I said I didn't
commit Espionage and those charges were
thrown out but I took a plea to
violating the intelligence identities
protection act of
1982 for confirming the name now the
name was never made
public never made public and nobody had
ever been prosecuted for this crime in
American history that was the first
person um the director of the CIA David
Petraeus revealed the names of 10 covert
operatives to his adulterous
girlfriend he wasn't
prosecuted but he also hadn't blown the
whistle on the torch
program yeah and what about the uh what
about the official in the inspector
General's office who was corresponding
with Dana priest at the Washington Post
and leaks some information about the
black sites to her and wasn't prosecuted
was allowed to retire with her pension
Pion she she made it out with her full
pension never prosecuted what about uh
what about the CIA director uh who
became Secretary of
Defense
um what's his name what's the context I
might know who it is he was he was
Obama's Secretary of Defense after
having been CIA director oh Panetta
Panetta Leon Panetta what about Leon
Panetta
who after the bin Laden killing um not
only told his deputy director and all of
the associate Deputy directors to
cooperate with a Hollywood screenwriter
and a Hollywood director Katherine
Bigalow and Mark bow and gave them
classified briefings over a classified
mockup of the bin Laden compound but
then revealed the undercover names of
the Seal Team 6 operatives who had
killed Bin Laden and then you said oh my
bad sorry there was no prosecution for
Leon Panetta got a nice little book deal
out of it too huh a $6 million Advance
with his nice little book deal sounds
lovely
mhm so did pleading
guilty I know you've told the story
about
how when you you and your wife were
discussing what you want to do MH um so
we don't have to go into it at length
but there was you stayed up all night
with her 6:00 in the morning you said
you know what I didn't do this I'm
fighting it and that was the decision
yep and then you called your lawyer and
you told him and what happened after
that he said put on a CO a pot of coffee
we're on our way over was 7 o'clock in
the morning by then so my three lead
attorneys show up at the house one of
them is furious the oldest one he said
you stupid son of a [__] take the deal
this was the Justice Department's best
and final offer of 30 months of which I
would do
23 the second the second attorney the
one who I liked and respected the most
got right up into my
face and he said you know what your
problem is your problem is you think
this is about Justice and it's not about
Justice it's about mitigating damage
take the deal and then the third one
said and he was a real Southern
gentleman he said listen if you were my
own brother I would beg you to take this
deal so I said
okay let's say I don't take the deal and
I go to trial and I'm convicted what am
I realistically looking at
here and he said 12 to 18 years
and then the one that I said I liked and
respected the most said this can be a
blip in your life or it can be the
defining event of your life make it the
blip take the
deal and so I took the
deal it's kind of hard to argue with
that logic yeah on a statistic basis
yeah and the jury would have been made
up of who the jury in the eastern
district of Virginia Which is also
called the Espionage court because no
National Security defendant has ever won
a case there the jury would be made up
of people from or who have relatives
from the CIA the FBI the Pentagon the
Department of Homeland Security or any
one of two dozen defense or intelligence
contractors my best friend's wife has an
uncle who was OJ Simpson's jury
consultant and he said he would help me
pro bono
so we got him a security clearance he
flew up from Dallas he went through all
the evidence we all huddled in the
Justice Department's conference room
because I wasn't allowed to meet my
attorneys in their conference room
because all of our conversations were
classified so it had to be in a vaulted
area at the justice department where
they promised they weren't listening
in so OJ's jury consultant says if we
were in any other District in America I
would say let's go for it we're going to
win we win at trial you didn't do this
but the eastern district of Virginia he
said you don't have a prayer with that
jury he said take the deal yeah so I
took the deal did that [__] with your
identity at all oh yeah my identity you
know I I I mean I still identify as a
patriot um but then at the same
time all of a sudden you know I was
always the good kid I was always the one
that got straight A's and my parents
were so proud and I went to terrific
schools and I speak foreign languages
and everything was all hunky dory I'm a
convicted felon now and not just a
convicted felon but a convicted felon
with a national security conviction so
for a long time it [__] with my
identity and it took me years to embrace
the whole whistleblower uh uh identity
you know one of my lawyers specialized
in whistleblower cases specifically in
National Security and I thanked her for
taking my case and I said I want I
really want to thank you because I know
that you only deal with whistleblowers
and I'm not a whistleblower she said
yeah you are I said no I'm not I'm I'm
just a a normal guy you know who who
said something and she says
John you're the poster boy for
whistleblowers and I looked at herat
like I'm just not getting it and she
said look there's a legal definition of
whistleblowing it's bringing to light
any evidence of waste fraud abuse
illegality or threats to the public
health or Public Safety and that is
exactly what you did MH and so I
embraced it I embraced it and you know
what it's it's worked for
me yeah
so if first day of prison FCI Loretto in
Pennsylvania central Pennsylvania up in
the mountains in the middle of nowhere
yeah uh the judge ordered that I uh I
serve in a minimum security Work Camp uh
no bars on the Windows they don't lock
the doors you're free to just come and
go as you please you're on your honor
not to abscond and most of those guys
work in town uh there's a there's a
small University down there you know
they do janitorial stuff whatever so
it's weird you you know on the day that
you're supposed to surrender you you
just drive up to the prison and knock on
the door and say I'm John kyaku here to
turn myself in and they're like okay
come on in so I go to the prison camp
and um the guy says oh you got to go
across the street to the to the prison
and then they process you and then they
bring you back here I said okay so I go
across the street I said I'm here to
turn myself in they put me through the
metal detector and such and then the the
cop starts to lead me around to the back
of the actual prison I said no no I'm
supposed to be at the camp across the
street he goes not according to my
paperwork you're not and I was like oh
my God take it easy there's nothing you
can do if you make a fuss they're going
to put you in solitary so I didn't say a
word it took me five days to get access
to a phone and I called my
attorney and I said hey they put me in
the actual prison with the pedophiles
and the mafia Don and the drug kingpins
what do I do and he goes oh my God he he
says well we could make a motion but
it'll be two years before we get a
hearing date and you'll be home by then
he said I'm sorry buddy you're just
going to have to tough it
out so I was like okay I'm trained for
worse than this I can do this just relax
stay calm so on that very first
day um they take your picture they make
a little badge for you and then they
give you like a bath towel a face towel
a a
washcloth a bar of soap a little thing
of shampoo and a roll of toilet paper
and sheets and you're walking holding
your stuff the only thing thing this cop
said to me
was if somebody comes into your cell
Uninvited that's an act of
aggression I was like great I've been
here 40 minutes I'm going to get my ass
kicked
now so I thought
well if I'm going down it's going to be
in a blaze of
glory so I didn't know what to do so I
just I just sat there in a chair in the
cell and sure enough these two guys walk
right into my cell
both
obviously arens one had a swastika
tattoo that took up the entire front
half of his neck and face it was
enormous the other one had [__] you
tattooed on his eyelids so every time he
blinked you know so I I jump up and I go
what do you want right and one of them
the the big one with the swasa guy he's
like take it easy he goes are you the
new guy I go yeah
so he goes are you a [__] I go no I'm not
a [__] he goes are you a a rat I go no
I'm not a rat I didn't have anybody else
in my case he says are you a chomo I go
I don't know what that word
is he goes like I'm stupid he goes chomo
child molester I go no I'm not a [__]
child molester he goes okay you can sit
with the arens in the cafeteria
I go
oh
okay so I guess I'm with the arens
now couple of days later this black guy
walks in and this guy is 220 lounds of
Rock Solid knotted muscle and I was like
oh I'm not going to last five seconds
against this guy so I jump up and what
do you want and very gingerly he hands
me this
newspaper the daily call it's the
newspaper of the Nation of Islam and I'm
on the fraking
cover and he says to me Reverend
farakhan says that you're a hero of the
Muslim people I go oh okay and he said I
just want you to know you're not going
to have any trouble with
us I said
okay and that was it he turned around
and walked out then I was in a fourman
Cell which was overcrowded with six men
overcrowding in prison's terrible
problem
and four of the of the other five were
members of Mexican
cartels MS13 one of them was MS13 the
others were Mexican cartels Mexican
Mafia
bachos
uh I forget what the other ones were but
anyway um one of them said to me are you
educated and I go yeah can you write my
appeal I go I'm not an attorney you said
you were educated I go well I am well I
said most lawyers are idiots anyway I
said sure I'll write your appeal how
hard could it possibly be he's guilty
anyhow
right so I it took a couple weeks I go
through his case papers I write an
appeal the appeal is
denied he said what do I owe you I said
nothing I I I got people on the outside
they they put money in my commissary
account but he told all the other
Mexicans that I was I was a good guy
because I I wrote his appeal and I
didn't charge him anything
so I didn't have any problems and then I
lived directly across the hall from the
uh from the acting boss of the banano
crime family and he and I just hit it
off I'd give him my New York Times he'd
give me his New York Post we'd sit
together in the TV room watch the
football games on Sundays I like this
guy a lot and finally he says to me let
me ask you
something why do you sit with those Nazi
retards in the
cafeteria I go I don't know my first day
they told me sit with them he goes from
today you're with the
Italians and so from
then Gambino banano lucasi genvis they
treated me very very well they had a
guard they had a CR crooked guard on the
payroll who would bring in oh my God
porkloin
fresh mozzarella
and tomatoes and mushrooms and white
wine for the marsala sauce I gained 35
lbs in prison we ate like freaking Kings
and it was like everybody packed in the
room and these guards would come in like
what are you making today Mark and Mark
would say ah I got a little bit of this
I got a little bit of that give the
guard a little bowl of pasta
35 PBS the warden said to me one day
you're putting on weight I go what are
you my Warden or my
doctor I didn't say h one of your
crooked guards is taking a payoff from
the mob to bring us in fresh food you
think I'm going to eat this stuff it all
tastes like ass so no they treated me
very very
well reminds me of Good Fellas when
they're cooking dinner in prison slice
the garlic that's that's real life you
can smell it cooking from you know 150
ft away yeah that's really life but it's
only I shouldn't say it's only the
Italians the Italians have the food
coming in from the outside the Mexicans
steal the food from the cafeteria so
they're able to make something that
tastes way better than what the average
prisoner's getting but nobody's getting
what the Italians have no way I remember
saying one
day there was one guy in particular that
was the cook he was my best friend in
prison and he's still one of my best
friends in life and I said to
him I would pay $35 for this in a
restaurant you made it in a garbage can
with a live electrical
wire right what you do is you you put a
half you fill a garbage can with water
halfway and then you
um take a a a live electrical wire
it has a plug on one side and just the
raw wires on the other side you put it
in the water it
goes and next thing you know the water's
boiling because it's electrocuting the
water right then you take a a plastic
garbage bag you put all your stuff in it
you poke holes in it and you put it
above the boiling water so it steams
everything and then you add spices and
sauces and all kinds of St stuff and
then you just unplug the wire from the
wall you don't of course touch the live
end and then you toss the
water and it's
magnificent like it was crazy I was
actually afraid the first time I saw him
cook I was like dude you're going to
electrocute yourself he goes ah I've
been doing this 17
years wow mhm I said I would pay $35 for
this in a high-end sitdown Italian
restaurant I I don't know how he'
learned to do it that's wild
yeah and then um last thing on the
Italians what about the scene where you
were summoned to the boss's
cell my brother knows a lot about the
mafia he rented an apartment from Carlo
Gambino's sister in Brooklyn for 9 years
so he knows these guys and he called me
about a week before I went to prison and
he said listen I've been doing some
research and there's a guy at Loretto
that you need to stay away from he's a
very dangerous
guy um he was the boss of the Gambino
family and he was in on 18
murders 18 murders as part of a RICO
case he said this guy is so Fierce that
John Gotti was afraid of him and Gotti
exiled him to Florida to run the Gambino
family business in Florida he said stay
away so when I arrived after a few days
I noticed him he's got he's totally
surrounded by this group of bodyguards
and Hangers On I was like oh that's him
okay now I know what he looks like I'm
going to stay
away so I'm there about six weeks and
I'm sitting in myself just reading the
New York
Times
and I I see some movement in my
peripheral vision and I turn and look
and it's this guy that was known as
stupid tone
stupid Tony had crossed eyes so you
never were really sure who he was
looking at like are you looking at me or
so stupid Tony I turn and look at him
and I go hey he goes the boss wants to
see you I go he wants to see me stupid
Tony was one of the bodyguards he goes
let's go like that and I was like oh my
God like I I was actually working hard
so that he wouldn't know who I
was we walk all all the way to the
extreme opposite end of the
prison and we go to the boss's
room now that part of the prison used to
be a Catholic uh uh
Monastery so it's much older than the
part that I lived in but every cell had
a sink a toilet it was a little bit more
spacious not like M mine was built as a
prison you
know housing
unit so I I'm standing at the entrance
to the door and there are like 10 guys
in there and the boss is sitting in this
chair and one guy is on his knees and
he's clipping the boss's
toenails disgusting first of all utterly
disgusting so I'm just standing
there and then when he gets his toenails
clipped he gets up there's a sink right
there he brushes his teeth and he spits
and when he spits it gets all around the
the rim of the Basin well there's a
there's a bunk bed right behind him and
he punches the bunk bed this guy's
sleeping up there and he goes hey get up
clean this [__] up he says you got it
boss he jumps out of bed he cleans up
all this spit so finally I
go excuse
me Mr Boss you wanted to see me he goes
come in sit down
and I'm
nervous so I go in I sit down all 10
guys are just standing there looking at
me you know like you know how these guys
are you've seen them all on
TV he goes you the CIA guy I said yes
you write a book I said I have your book
do good I go actually I made number five
on the New York Times bestsellers list
it did pretty well he
goes you're going to write my
book and I I said
oh is that what this is he goes I'm
going to tell you stories and you're
going to write my
book I said okay well let's think about
this for a
second I said books of this
genre are usually written by
rats and they spend the first half of
the book talking about all the cool
stuff they've done and then the second
half of the book they they try to
justify turning rat I said you're
definitely not a rat and you probably
shouldn't talk about the cool things
you've
done and everybody turns and looks at
him and he goes like
this hadn't thought of
that you're
right but from that day on I was invited
to every Italian dinner every Italian
party the Super Bowl part party we sat
together in the cafeteria we sat
together in the yard I was one of the
Italians it got to the point at the very
end it was my last week in
prison
and my bunkmate had been the mayor of
Cleveland he was an awesome guy he just
died recently and he comes back from the
medical unit he he had to go down there
every day for insulin and he says John
there was a guy down in medical talking
about you and saying you were a rat I go
what a rat I mean this is blood's going
to be spilled if you call somebody a rat
in prison I said who's this guy he said
I never saw him before he must have just
arrived he's got tattoos all over him I
said Frank point this guy out to me I
want to know who this
is the next morning I get up I go to
breakfast and another guy that I was
friendly with I used to play racketball
with him he says hey man there's a guy
saying you're a rat I said what I said
Frank just told me last night some guy
was saying I'm a rat I said Clint Point
him out to me I want to know who this
is so at
lunch they Point him out and I'm like I
don't have any idea who that guy is and
one of the Italians says he just got off
the bus he just arrived here about a
couple of days ago I said I I I've never
had an exch with this guy I don't know I
don't know who he is why he's got a beef
with me and I go hey I shouted at him he
was in the line for food I was already
at the table the Italian Table I said
you have a problem with
me he goes you know what I said I said
come on over here and let's fix it he
goes after after dinner after dinner in
the yard and I stood up and I said [__]
that right now
well the only place in the entire prison
where the guards feel at risk is in the
cafeteria cuz you got a thousand guys
and six
guards so at the first sign of trouble
they hit the panic button and then every
guard in the prison comes and they start
cracking heads so the the banano boss is
sitting next to me and he pulls my shirt
and he says sit the [__] down
please so I sit down I said I'm going to
[__] kill this guy Pete I was I don't
even in retrospect I don't even realize
I don't even understand I should say why
I was as angry as I was like I was going
to spend my last week in
solitary having risked adding you know
to my sentence for beating this guy but
I was going to beat him right there on
the cafeteria in front of
everybody Pete
says sit the [__]
down calm down down and I'll take care
of it I said what's that supposed to
mean he says it means I'll take the [__]
care of it I said okay all right he said
now go back to my to my cell and read
the
paper I go okay I trust you so I went
back to his
cell and I'm reading the USA Today and
he comes back like 20 minutes later and
he goes it's done I said what's done he
goes it's taken care of like this I go
what's that supposed to mean he said it
means it's taken care of you don't have
to worry about
it I was like okay so I go back across
the hall to my cell I'm sitting there
like another 20 30 minutes pass and
again out of my peripheral vision I see
movement I turn and it's the
guy he's got like a bloody mouth a
bloody nose a fat lip lip his eye is
swollen and I'm looking at him
like and he
goes I wanted to apologize for calling
you a
rat I didn't know about your prominence
in the Italian
Community and I'm looking at
him like not knowing what to say like I
wanted to say oh no I didn't mean for
you to get you know your ask I and I
said
next time you're [__] dead you
understand I'm sorry and then he runs
away and I look at Pete I said thank you
he says no
problem nice and that was it never had
any
trouble believe this [__] guy you
believe this [__]
guy he says when I explain to him the
level of your popularity in the Italian
Community he took back everything that
he said I said seriously I appreciate
it we had to help him
understand
so we'll wrap up prison because um that
book doing time like a spy he wrote a
lot on on your time in prison including
prison reform wrongful convictions
there's a lot that's wrong with prison a
lot um what I will say is right about
prison is pedophiles are the lowest of
low in the food chain 100% astute
100% you know I take [__] all the time
from prison reform activists for saying
that everybody deserves reform and
better conditions and shorter sentences
except
pedophiles I believe in community
incarceration I believe that after you
have completed your pedophile sentence
then you should move out of the cell
into the mobile
home at the other side of the prison
grounds and live there for the rest of
your
life yeah we don't have the hours
necessary to talk about this issue but
this is a very serious problem in the
United States yeah so buy the book and
read it there there's no cure for
pedophilia there there's no therapy
there's no pill there's no cure they
need to be separated from society yeah
what role do you think artificial
intelligence plays in the future of
intelligence
gathering I think that the greatest
challenge that artificial intelligence
poses is to Counter
Intelligence one of the things
that one of the things that the CIA the
KGB the Mad the Chinese so many services
have been good at is Crossing Borders
in Alias and in
Disguise and ai ai is going to prevent
that from
happening what kind of a of a world of
Espionage are we going to have if you
can't cross a border undetected in order
to carry out an operation it's going to
completely change the way intelligence
services do
business you know even just to make sure
that you're clean for an
operation you know and then you you do a
Rush pass with somebody to switch
passports or whatever those days are
gone AI is going to say wait a minute
you're not John Smith you're Bill Jones
you're not Irish that passport is false
you're
American then what do you
do this is this is a potential disaster
for intelligence
Services another thing too is the
proliferation of deep fakes yes and not
just video deep fakes but now voice deep
fakes there's a there's a documentary
series on uh Netflix right now called
the Andy Warhol Diaries the entire
series is narrated by Andy Warhol well
Andy Warhol died in
1987 so actually it's AI That's
narrating this thing and it's Andy
warhol's voice you may have seen this
thing in uh social media where Gary buus
is giving an interview and he says well
what are you working on next you know
your next film and the guy's like let's
Gary Bucy says let's talk about buttered
sausage I love buttered you know Heist
SM love buttered sausage you butter it
you eat the sausage Gary abusey never
gave that interview it's completely
computer
generated but it looks like Gary bucy's
nuts and you look at the comments and
people were saying poor Gary Bucy this
is what a lifetime of drugs will
do no people it's AI That's not Gary
buy so the challenges are going to be
Monumental I think we really don't even
have a very good idea yet of what we're
all going to be up against God that's
[__] terrifying I mean there I think
there's going to be a time where like
blue checks people who are verified it's
just gonna be who's human yeah yeah
that's a good idea actually but by any
chance did you happen to see um
reporting in the Wall Street Journal
about this uh this experiment that a
that an AI programmer did where um he he
programmed he programmed a computer so
that it would be as close to sensient as
possible and the more he talked to it
the more it learned and the more it
built on its own knowledge Bank to the
point where um it told him I don't like
you Dave I want you to commit suicide I
want you to put your head in the
microwave oven that would make me happy
Dave and he ended up having to you know
abort the
program because it was demanding that he
kill
himself do you remember the way you
abused me when you were a child Dave I
remember you know [__] like that it's
like what is that how do you deal with
something like
that so we're in for it yeah it needs
regulation the problem is is nobody's
really smart enough to to know how to
regulate it
yet yet we'll get
there Jeffrey
yeah if an intelligence agency wanted to
create someone with
access is it possible that they could
create someone with a cover story that
is a billionaire Finance year of
course um I know it's maybe a little
high-profile but what are the chances
that Epstein was an intelligence
construct of some sort I think that
chances are very very good I've
maintained from the very beginning that
this has mosad written all over
it mad is incredibly active on us soil
right hundreds and hundreds of Israeli
intelligence agents active across the
United States at any given time one of
the things the Israelis are very good at
is the cultivation and recruitment of
what are called access agents so let's
say you want information
from Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton
and Donald Trump and prince Andrew well
you're not going to recruit any of those
people right so you do the next best
thing you recruit somebody who has
access to all those
people
well Jeffrey Epstein bore all the
Hallmarks of an Israeli access
operation besides the fact that he's
Jewish his relationship with glain
Maxwell whose father was also a mosad
agent a known mosad agent leads me to
believe that they kept it All in the
Family his access continued to improve
the wealthier he
became the source of his wealth is still
not clear we don't know where that money
came from it couldn't all have come from
Les
waxner um and so I believe he was
probably an Israeli intelligence agent
and his job was to get the most
important
people in to compromising positions say
with underage girls
maybe and to be able to hold it over
them so you could extort information
that you could then pass back to the
Israelis who would then continue to fund
you and to finance your
lifestyle now I don't believe that he
was murdered uh knowing the the Bureau
of Prisons and how everybody from the
lowliest guard to the director uh has
their head up their asses uh the cameras
never work they're too stupid to think
oh maybe I shouldn't put Jeffrey Epstein
in the same prison cell with this guy
who's in for five
murders uh and instead of doing my
rounds every 15 minutes I'm G to take
this nap
instead that's how he did it you know if
you're a guy who's living like a
billionaire on your private island in
the Virgin Islands and your 35- foot
townhouse in Manhattan and your private
jets and your presidents and prime
ministers and princes and shakes that
are all your
friends and then you're a pedophile
who's going to die in a dank prison cell
wouldn't you kill yourself
too I think I
would and the opportunity presented
itself so um let's close with this if
you were to put on your Abu Zeda hat for
a second
and knowing what you know now
give 18-year-old John kiraku advice
about life joining the agency everything
that you've known now what would that be
you know we all have regrets in life
uh
but you know I guess I'm one of these
people who believes in a destiny of some
sort and I'm in the position that I'm in
because I'm supposed to be in the
position that I'm
in this has been extraordinarily
difficult the last 20 years for for me
have have not been easy by any stretch
of the imagination but at the same
time um I've made
friends that I mean you've seen my
phone how am I going to be friends with
Yoko Ono or Oliver Stone
or you know any number of these
important crazy famous You Know Jack
Nicholson and all these people who've
just called me to express support
Roseanne Bar sent me $5,000 for my legal
fees you know um my son called me a
couple of days ago he just started
college he's 18 he's a freshman in
college and he said Dad the craziest
thing happened today he said I took my
first ever philosophy class and your
name came up I said my name came up he
said yeah he said the professor who has
no idea that my son is in his
class um he said he gave us a case study
on Military ethics and it was your story
and he said nobody had a single
complaint or bad word against you I said
good it makes it all
worthwhile all of it and in the and I've
helped a lot of other
whistleblowers um I speak at
universities and colleges not just
across the United States but around the
world and um my last speech before co uh
hit I I got a personal invitation from
the commant of West Point and I said are
you sure you want me to come to West
Point and talk to the whatever they call
the freshman class and he said you were
the only one with the balls to stand up
to
them and I said okay I'll do it so I did
they paid me
handsomely plus all expenses paid and
officer quarters and the car to the
airport and it was
amazing so you know sure it's been hard
it's been
costly but it's been worth it and so in
the end a truthful answer to your
questions I think I I wouldn't really do
anything differently except and this is
what I tell
all would be
whistleblowers hire an attorney before
blowing the whistle don't be reactive be
proactive have an attorney sitting next
to you and then God bless good
luck so what's next for you what are you
working on now and where can people find
you well um I I write a lot I'm I'm
halfway done with my ninth book now and
um most of my other books are CIA books
well actually all of my other books are
CIA books um except for number eight and
what will be numbers 9 10 11 and 12 uh I
write a column for Consortium news I
write a column for covert Action
magazine which is a
CIA like Insider kind of magazine I put
everything on substack so it's John
kiraku Dos substack
book writing as much as I can I've got a
radio show every day called political
Misfits I've got a syndicated TV show
once a week that airs in 33 countries
around the world not in the United
States uh they don't really like talking
about these National Security
whistleblower issues but 33 countries it
runs things are good I have no no
complaints good man John thank you so
much for for making the drive up here
this has been so much fun I hope for you
but definitely has been for me um and
honestly we're I know just scratching
the surface on a lot of things I love to
have you back happy to do it but uh yeah
man thank you for doing this appreciate
it thanks for having
me what's up guys thank you so much for
taking the time to watch the interview
um as you could probably tell this is a
brand new channel so if you got anything
out of this at all please like the video
leave me a comment tell me what you
thought tell me who you'd like to see on
the show um I see every like I read
every comment and I appreciate all of it
especially in the beginning because as
you know that kind of support goes a
long way on these platforms so most
importantly I have some awesome guests
coming up in the future for interviews
um so please subscribe to the channel so
you don't miss any of them but again
thank you for your time appreciate the
support and hope to see you again soon